% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
\PassOptionsToPackage{dvipsnames,svgnames,x11names}{xcolor}
%
\documentclass[
  11pt,
]{article}

\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{iftex}
\ifPDFTeX
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
\usepackage{lmodern}
\ifPDFTeX\else  
    % xetex/luatex font selection
  \setmainfont[]{Arial}
  \setmonofont[]{DejaVu Sans Mono}
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{xcolor}
\usepackage[lmargin=0.8in,rmargin=0.8in,tmargin=0.8in,bmargin=0.8in]{geometry}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-\maxdimen} % remove section numbering
% Make \paragraph and \subparagraph free-standing
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldparagraph\paragraph
  \renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
  \renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi


\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}\usepackage{longtable,booktabs,array}
\usepackage{calc} % for calculating minipage widths
% Correct order of tables after \paragraph or \subparagraph
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\makeatletter
\patchcmd\longtable{\par}{\if@noskipsec\mbox{}\fi\par}{}{}
\makeatother
% Allow footnotes in longtable head/foot
\IfFileExists{footnotehyper.sty}{\usepackage{footnotehyper}}{\usepackage{footnote}}
\makesavenoteenv{longtable}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother
% definitions for citeproc citations
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproctext{}{}
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproc{mm}{%
  \begingroup\def\citeproctext{#2}\cite{#1}\endgroup}
\makeatletter
 % allow citations to break across lines
 \let\@cite@ofmt\@firstofone
 % avoid brackets around text for \cite:
 \def\@biblabel#1{}
 \def\@cite#1#2{{#1\if@tempswa , #2\fi}}
\makeatother
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-indent, #2 entry-spacing
 {\begin{list}{}{%
  \setlength{\itemindent}{0pt}
  \setlength{\leftmargin}{0pt}
  \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}
  % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
  \ifodd #1
   \setlength{\leftmargin}{\cslhangindent}
   \setlength{\itemindent}{-1\cslhangindent}
  \fi
  % set entry spacing
  \setlength{\itemsep}{#2\baselineskip}}}
 {\end{list}}
\usepackage{calc}
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{\hfill\break\parbox[t]{\linewidth}{\strut\ignorespaces#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}

\usepackage{codehigh}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{tabularray}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\UseTblrLibrary{booktabs}
\NewTableCommand{\tinytableDefineColor}[3]{\definecolor{#1}{#2}{#3}}
\newcommand{\tinytableTabularrayUnderline}[1]{\underline{#1}}
\newcommand{\tinytableTabularrayStrikeout}[1]{\sout{#1}}
\usepackage{lineno}
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\AtBeginDocument{%
\ifdefined\contentsname
  \renewcommand*\contentsname{Table of contents}
\else
  \newcommand\contentsname{Table of contents}
\fi
\ifdefined\listfigurename
  \renewcommand*\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\else
  \newcommand\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\fi
\ifdefined\listtablename
  \renewcommand*\listtablename{List of Tables}
\else
  \newcommand\listtablename{List of Tables}
\fi
\ifdefined\figurename
  \renewcommand*\figurename{Fig.}
\else
  \newcommand\figurename{Fig.}
\fi
\ifdefined\tablename
  \renewcommand*\tablename{Table}
\else
  \newcommand\tablename{Table}
\fi
}
\@ifpackageloaded{float}{}{\usepackage{float}}
\floatstyle{ruled}
\@ifundefined{c@chapter}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}[chapter]}
\floatname{codelisting}{Listing}
\newcommand*\listoflistings{\listof{codelisting}{List of Listings}}
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\@ifpackageloaded{subcaption}{}{\usepackage{subcaption}}
\makeatother
\ifLuaTeX
  \usepackage{selnolig}  % disable illegal ligatures
\fi
\usepackage{bookmark}

\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={Mechanism of barotaxis in marine zooplankton},
  pdfkeywords={pressure sensation, plankton, sensory systems, cilia},
  colorlinks=true,
  linkcolor={blue},
  filecolor={Maroon},
  citecolor={Blue},
  urlcolor={Blue},
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}

\title{Mechanism of barotaxis in marine zooplankton}
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\makeatletter
\providecommand{\subtitle}[1]{% add subtitle to \maketitle
  \apptocmd{\@title}{\par {\large #1 \par}}{}{}
}
\makeatother
\subtitle{\raggedright

Luis Alberto Bezares Calderón\textsuperscript{1,*} , Réza
Shahidi\textsuperscript{1,2}, Gáspár Jékely\textsuperscript{1,3,*}
\newline\textsuperscript{1}Living Systems Institute, University of
Exeter, Stocker road, Exeter, EX4 \newline\textsuperscript{2} Electron
Microscopy Core Facility (EMCF), University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany \newline\textsuperscript{3}Heidelberg University,
Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany \newline
\textsuperscript{*}Correspondence: l.a.bezares-calderon @ exeter.ac.uk,
gaspar.jekely @ cos.uni-heidelberg.de}
\author{}
\date{}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\linenumbers

\renewcommand*\contentsname{Table of contents}
{
\hypersetup{linkcolor=}
\setcounter{tocdepth}{3}
\tableofcontents
}
\setstretch{1.2}
\subsection{Abstract}\label{abstract}

Hydrostatic pressure is a dominant environmental cue for vertically
migrating marine organisms but the physiological mechanisms of
responding to pressure changes remain unclear. Here we uncovered the
cellular and circuit bases of a barokinetic response in the planktonic
larva of the marine annelid \emph{Platynereis dumerilii}. Increased
pressure induced a rapid, graded and adapting upward swimming response
due to the faster beating of cilia in the head multiciliary band. By
calcium imaging, we found that brain ciliary photoreceptors showed a
graded response to pressure changes. The photoreceptors in animals
mutant for \emph{ciliary opsin-1} had a smaller sensory compartment and
mutant larvae showed diminished pressure responses. The ciliary
photoreceptors synaptically connect to the head multiciliary band via
serotonergic motoneurons. Genetic inhibition of the serotonergic cells
blocked pressure-dependent increases in ciliary beating. We conclude
that ciliary photoreceptors function as pressure sensors and activate
ciliary beating through serotonergic signalling during barokinesis.

\#

\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}

Hydrostatic pressure increases linearly with depth in the ocean and
planktonic organisms can use it as a depth cue, which is independent of
light or the time of the day (Blaxter, 1978). Many marine invertebrate
animals have long been known to sense and respond to changes in pressure
(Knight-Jones and Qasim, 1955; Rice, 1964). The response generally
consists of an increase in locomotion (barokinesis) upon an increase in
pressure. Such responses could help planktonic animals retain their
depth either in combination with, or independent of light cues (Forward
et al., 1989). Changes in hydrostatic pressure may additionally entrain
tidal rhythms in marine animals (Akiyama, 2004; Morgan, 1965; Naylor and
Williams, 1984).\\
Early studies on the barokinetic response in zooplankton have not
revealed if the animals respond to relative or absolute changes in
pressure. The kinematics and neuronal mechanisms of pressure responses
have also not been characterized in detail for any planktonic animal.
The most familiar structures for sensing changes in hydrostatic pressure
are gas-filled compressible vesicles such as the swim bladder in fish
(Qutob, 1963). However, barokinetic responses are seen across many
animals without any identifiable gas-filled vesicles. What structures
could mediate pressure sensing in these organisms? Thus far, only a few
alternative structures have been proposed for pressure sensation. In the
statocyst of the adult crab \emph{Carcinus maenas}, millimeter-sized
thread-hairs may act as a syringe plunger to sense pressure (Fraser and
Macdonald, 1994). In dogfish, which lack a swim bladder, hair cells in
the vestibular organ have been proposed to act as pressure detectors
(Fraser and Shelmerdine, 2002). It is unknown which, if any, of these
two vastly different pressure sensing mechanisms---one based on volume
changes in a gas-filled vesicle and the other on deformation of sensory
cilia---is used by the much smaller planktonic animals.\\
To understand the behavioural and neuronal mechanisms of pressure
responses in marine zooplankton, we studied the planktonic ciliated
larvae of the marine annelid \emph{Platynereis dumerilii} (Özpolat et
al., 2021). This larva uses ciliary beating to swim up and down in the
water column to eventually settle on sea grass beds near coastal regions
(Gambi et al., 1992). The sensory and neuronal bases of light-guided
(Gühmann et al., 2015; Randel et al., 2014; Verasztó et al., 2018) and
mechanically-driven behaviours (Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018) in
\emph{Platynereis} larvae have been dissected due to the experimental
tractability of this system. Its small size has allowed the entire
reconstruction of the cellular and synaptic wiring map of the
three-day-old larva (Jasek et al., 2022; Jékely et al., 2024). Here we
study \emph{Platynereis} larvae to understand the cellular and neuronal
bases of pressure sensation in zooplankton.

\section{Results}\label{results}

\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Platynereis} larvae respond to changes
in hydrostatic
pressure}{Platynereis larvae respond to changes in hydrostatic pressure}}\label{platynereis-larvae-respond-to-changes-in-hydrostatic-pressure}

To determine whether \emph{Platynereis} larvae respond to changes in
hydrostatic pressure, we developed a custom behavioural chamber with
precise pressure control. We subjected larvae to step changes in
pressure and recorded their behaviour under near-infrared illumination
(Figure 1A; see \hyperref[materials-and-methods]{Materials and
Methods}). We used hydrocarbon-free compressed air to increase pressure
in the chamber. We tested a range of pressure levels in randomized order
from 3 mbar to 1000 mbar (1 mbar equals to 1 cm water depth) (Figure
1---figure supplement 1A). We focused on one- to three-day-old larvae
corresponding to the early and late trochophore and nectochaete stages.
We used batches of \textgreater{} 100 larvae for each experiment. Both
two-day-old and three-day-old larvae respond to pressure increase by
swimming upwards faster and in straighter trajectories, as quantified by
changes in average vertical displacement, swimming speed, the ratio of
upward to downward trajectories (Figure 1B--C, Figure 1---figure
supplement 1B--D; Video 1), and a straightness index (the net over total
distance) (Figure 1---figure supplement 1E).

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure1.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 1.} Pressure response in \emph{Platynereis}
larvae. (A) Schematic of the behavioural setup used to stimulate larvae
with controlled pressure levels. (B-C) Vertical displacement of (B)
two-day-old and (C) three-day-old larvae (insets) as a function of time
relative to different step increases in pressure. Dashed line at 60 s
indicates the end of stimulation. Each data point is the average of 2 to
12 (B), or 4 to 5 (C) batches of larvae. (D-E) Maximum increase in
relative vertical displacement of (D) two-day-old and (E) three-day-old
larvae for each pressure level tested. Small filled circles represent
individual data points, data points from the same batch are joined by
lines. Larger open circles indicate the mean across all batches. (F)
Vertical displacement of three-day-old larvae acclimated for ca. 10 min
to either ambient pressure (0 mb, left), 100 mb (centre), or 500 mb
(right) prior to the experiment. Lines are coloured by set fractional
increments in pressure. (G) Maximum increase in relative vertical
displacement of three-day-old larvae acclimated to 0 mb, 100 mb or 500
mb. The data are fitted with a saturation curve. 5 (0, 100 mb) or 6 (500
mb) batches tested in F---G. (H) Maximum ciliary beat frequency (CBF)
that single larvae reached in the 30 s prior (category \emph{Before}),
or during the first 30 s (\emph{Stimulus}) of the indicated increase in
pressure. N = 18-22 larvae. Data points for the same larva are joined by
lines. One-tailed paired t-test with Bonferroni correction testing for
an increase in CBF; p-values \textless{} 0.05 are shown. Data in D, E
and G were fitted with a 3rd (D, E) or a 2nd (G) order polynomial
function. Figure 1---source data 1 (A,D), Figure 1---source data 2
(C,E), Figure 1---source data 3 (F-G),Figure 1---source data 4 (H).}

\end{figure}%

We used the maximal vertical displacement value (normalised to the mean
displacement per trial prior to stimulus presentation) to compare the
magnitude of responses as a function of pressure change. In both two-
and three-day-old larvae the responses were graded: higher pressure
levels led to higher maximal vertical displacement (Figure 1D--E).
Three-day-old larvae had a slightly lower sensitivity threshold (10-20
mbar) than two-day-old larvae (20-30 mbar) and their response plateaued
at lower pressure levels than that of two-day-old larvae (Figure 1B-E).
One-day-old larvae did not show a detectable response to even the
largest pressure levels tested (Figure 1---figure supplement 2A--B). The
straightness of trajectories also increased with increasing pressure
changes. This was due to narrower helical swimming paths under pressure,
visible in close-up videos (Video 2 \& Video 3). Three-day-old larvae
also showed a diving response upon the release of pressure (Figure
1B--C, F; Figure 1---figure supplement 1C--D). Two-day-old larvae
stopped moving upwards when the stimulus ended, but did not show an
active diving response to pressure OFF.

To exclude the possibility that either the changes in the partial
pressure of gases due to the use of compressed air, or the mechanical
wave associated to the inflow of air caused the upward swimming
behaviour, we also used a static column of water of different heights to
change pressure levels (Figure 1---figure supplement 2C). We observed
the same dependence of vertical displacement on the magnitude of
pressure change in this setup (Figure 1---figure supplement 2D-E).
Overall, our experiments uncovered a graded, saturable and highly
sensitive upward swimming ON response to increased pressure in
\emph{Platynereis} larvae and a diving OFF response (in three-day-old
larvae only).

\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Platynereis} larvae respond to
relative changes of
pressure}{Platynereis larvae respond to relative changes of pressure}}\label{platynereis-larvae-respond-to-relative-changes-of-pressure}

Larvae may either detect absolute pressure levels, relative changes, or
the rate at which pressure changes (Morgan, 1984). To differentiate
between these possibilities, we first exposed larvae to linear increases
of pressure with rates between 0.05 mbar s-1 and 2.6 mbar s-1 (Figure
1---figure supplement 3A). We used a 2nd-degree polynomial function for
rate categories 0.3-0.7 mbar s-1 (ANOVA, p = 6.5e-3) and 0.9-1.3 mbar
s-1 (ANOVA, p= 5.8e-8 ), as it described the relationship between
vertical displacement and pressure more accurately than a simple linear
model. The difference between a linear and a 2nd-degree polynomial fit
was not significant for rates \textgreater{} 1.3 mbar s-1 (ANOVA,
p\textasciitilde{} 0.1). These results suggest that larvae compensate
for the increase in pressure by a corresponding increase in upward
swimming when rates of pressure increase are sufficiently high.

The linear response to a gradual increase in pressure suggests that
larvae detect changes in pressure, rather than absolute pressure levels.
To directly address this, we acclimated three-day-old larvae for ca. 10
min to either 100 mbar or 500 mbar pressure above the atmospheric level.
We then tested a range of randomized step-increases in pressure levels
(Figure 1---figure supplement 3D). After the acclimation period, the
distribution of larvae exposed to 100 mbar or 500 mbar was not different
from the larvae kept at ambient levels (two-sided Kolmogorov Smirnoff
test, 0--100 mbar: p = 0.915, 0--500 mbar: p = 0.0863) (Figure
1---figure supplement 3E--F). Upon step increase, larvae reacted with
graded upward swimming even if they were pre-exposed to 100 or 500 mbar
(Figure 1F). The sensitivity decreased when larvae were acclimated to
500 mbar (Figure 1G). When pressure was released at the end of the
increase trials, larvae pre-exposed to 500 mbar showed a downward
displacement followed by an upward displacement as soon as pressure was
increased back to the corresponding basal level (Figure 1---figure
supplement 3G). The downward displacement resembled the magnitude of the
diving response we observed for 3-day-old larvae (Figure 1---figure
supplement 3H).

Our experiments suggest that \emph{Platynereis} larvae react to relative
increases in pressure in a graded manner proportional to the magnitude
of the increase. The response is adaptable and occurs at very different
basal pressures (0 mbar or 500 mbar---corresponding to surface or 5 m of
water depth). This hints at a pressure-gauge mechanism to regulate
swimming depth by compensating for vertical movements due to
down-welling currents (Genin et al., 2005), sinking (when cilia are
arrested (Verasztó et al., 2017)) or downward swimming (e.g., during
UV-avoidance (Verasztó et al., 2018)).

\subsection{Ciliary beat frequency increases with
pressure}\label{ciliary-beat-frequency-increases-with-pressure}

To understand the mechanism by which larvae regulate swimming in
response to an increase in pressure, we analysed the effect of pressure
on ciliary beating in the prototroch---the main ciliary band that
propels swimming in two-day-old and three-day-old \emph{Platynereis}
larvae. Individual two-day-old larvae were tethered to a glass cuvette
from the posterior end with a non-toxic glue previously used in
\emph{Platynereis} larvae (Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018). The cuvette
was inserted into a custom-made pressure vessel placed under a
microscope. We applied 60-sec step increases in pressure in a randomized
order and recorded ciliary beating in effective darkness (Figure
1---figure supplement 4A, B).

The mean ciliary beat frequency increased as soon as a step change in
pressure was applied, with larger step changes showing more noticeable
increases in beat frequency (Figure 1---figure supplement 4C, Video 4).
The maximum ciliary beat frequency (max. CBF) during the stimulus period
showed a statistically significant increase for all but the lowest
pressure steps tested relative to the period before the onset of the
stimulus (85 mb p = 0.046, 237.5 mb p = 2.08 E-05, 556 mb p = 8.35 E-07,
988 mb p = 7.8 E-07; one-tailed paired t-test with Bonferroni correction
testing for an increase in CBF; Figure 1H). The related relative measure
of maximum percent change (max. ∆\%CBF) also showed an increase under
pressure (Figure 1---figure supplement 4D). Overall, these data suggest
that rapid upward swimming under pressure is due to an increase in the
beating frequency of prototroch cilia that is proportional to the change
in pressure.

\subsection{Brain ciliary photoreceptor cells show graded activation
under increased
pressure}\label{brain-ciliary-photoreceptor-cells-show-graded-activation-under-increased-pressure}

To identify the pressure-sensitive cells in \emph{Platynereis} larvae,
we developed an approach to couple imaging of neuronal activity~with
pressure increases (Figure 2A). We injected fertilised eggs with mRNA
encoding the calcium indicator GCaMP6s (Chen et al., 2013)---an indirect
reporter of neuronal activity---and embedded injected larvae in
low-melting agarose. Mounted larvae were introduced into a custom-built
microscopy chamber, where pressure could be increased using compressed
air. To provide morphological landmarks and to correct for Z-shifts
during imaging, we co-injected larvae with an mRNA encoding the
membrane-tagged reporter palmitoylated tdTomato.

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure2.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 2.} Ca²⁺ imaging of \emph{Platynereis} larvae
during pressure increases. (A) Ca²⁺ imaging preparation to analyse
neuronal activation upon pressure stimulation. Left: side view of the 3D
model of the microscopy pressure chamber. Right: Larvae embedded in
agarose are placed on a round coverslip. An enclosure around the
embedded larva serves to keep it under water. Bottom: the enclosed larva
on the coverslip is inserted in the central hole of the chamber. A
screwable lid secures the coverslip to the chamber and prevents air
leaks. Pressure is increased with compressed air entering from one of
the inlets. (B, top) Maximum intensity projection of a two-day-old larva
injected with \emph{GCaMP6s} mRNA acquired before (left) or during
(right) the pressure stimulus. (B, bottom) Enlarged views of the
corresponding regions highlighted with dashed squares in the top panels.
Asterisks mark the position of cell nuclei of the four cells activated
by pressure. (C) Still images of a cPRC acquired at different time
points relative to increase in pressure (t = 0, Video 5). The time
points are indicated on the upper left of each panel. Pressure level is
also indicated. (D) Maximum intensity projection of a GCaMP6s Z-stack
during raised pressure (white channel) and of a Z-stack of the same
larva after immunofluorescence (IF) with NIT-GC2, a marker for cPRC
cilia (Jokura et al., 2023), and for serotonin (cyan channel). Anterior
view in B--D. (E) Mean ∆R/R in cPRC\_l1 across different step increases
in pressure as a function of time of stimulation. Dashed line at 60 s
marks the end of stimulus. N = 8 larvae. (F) Max. ∆R/R in cPRC\_l1 as a
function of pressure level. Data points from the same larva are joined
by lines. Regression line fitting the data is also shown. One-tailed
unpaired t-test with Bonferroni correction testing for an increase in
Max. ∆R/R with pressure. p-values \textless{} 0.05 are shown. Figure
2---source data 1 (E-F).}

\end{figure}%

By imaging the entire larva before and during the pressure stimulus, we
found a group of four cells in the dorsomedial brain that showed
consistent increases in GCaMP6s fluorescence when pressure increased
(Figure 2B; Figure 2---figure supplement 1). Time-lapse recordings of
these cells revealed that they had prominent cilia, which become visible
by the increase in GCaMP6s signal during pressure increase (Figure 2C,
Figure 2---Supplement Video 1). The position, number, size and
morphology of these cells closely matched to that of the previously
described brain ciliary photoreceptor cells (cPRCs) (Arendt et al.,
2004; Tsukamoto et al., 2017; Verasztó et al., 2018). Immunostaining of
the same larvae that were used for Ca\textsuperscript{2+} imaging with
an antibody raised against NIT-GC2, a marker of cPRC cilia (Jokura et
al., 2023), followed by image registration directly confirmed that the
four cells activated under pressure were the cPRCs (Figure 2D).

To characterise the response of cPRCs to pressure, we applied a
randomised set of pressure increases (Figure 2---figure supplement 2A)
to two-day-old larvae expressing GCaMP6s while recording fluorescence
changes in the four cPRCs. All four cPRCs responded to the pressure
levels tested (Figure 2E; Figure 2---figure supplement 2B--C). This
response---like that observed at the behavioural level---was graded and
increased proportionally to the pressure change (Figure 2E--2F; Figure
2---figure supplement 2B--C, 2E). The difference in the response between
pressure levels was statistically significant for some of the cPRCs
(Figure 2F; Figure 2---figure supplement 2C). The calcium signal also
decreased rapidly after stimulus onset. Therefore, cPRCs may be able to
directly encode the intensity of the stimulation in their activity,
reflected in their internal Ca\textsuperscript{2+} levels, and adapt to
pressure levels. Their unique sensory morphology and pressure-induced
Ca\textsuperscript{2+} dynamics make the cPRCs candidate pressure
receptors.

An additional unpaired sensory cell on the dorsal side was also
activated in some of the trials (Figure 2---figure supplement 1, green
asterisk). We refer to this cell here as SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp} (by
position and morphology it corresponds to the neurosecretory cell
SN\textsuperscript{YFa+} (Williams et al., 2017)). At 750 mb, this cell
responded by a transient but robust increase at stimulation onset, but
∆R/R dropped to basal values before the end of the stimulus, unlike the
cPRC response (Figure 2---figure supplement 2D).
SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp} (SN\textsuperscript{YFa+}) may also
contribute to the pressure response, although it is less sensitive than
cPRCs and has very few synapses (Williams et al., 2017).

Another indirect observation that is consistent with cPRCs being the
primary pressure receptors is that one-day-old larvae that lack
differentiated cPRCs (Fischer et al., 2010) do not respond to pressure
(Figure 1---figure supplement 2A).

\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{c-opsin-1} mutants have a reduced
pressure
response}{c-opsin-1 mutants have a reduced pressure response}}\label{c-opsin-1-mutants-have-a-reduced-pressure-response}

cPRCs express ciliary-opsin-1 (c-ops-1), which forms a UV-absorbing
photopigment (Arendt et al., 2004; Tsukamoto et al., 2017; Verasztó et
al., 2018). Knocking out the \emph{c-ops-1} gene abolishes a
UV-avoidance response in \emph{Platynereis} larvae (Verasztó et al.,
2018). As cPRCs respond to pressure increases, we tested whether
\emph{c-ops-1} knockout mutants (\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}})
also showed a defect in the pressure response.

A range of step increases in pressure were applied to single batches of
either wild-type (WT) or \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}
three-day-old larvae (Figure 3---figure supplement 1A). The assays were
carried out in a smaller pressure vessel (height: \textasciitilde4 cm),
to allow consistent imaging of the fewer mutant larvae available. The
swimming speed of \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} mutant larvae
was not significantly different from \emph{WT} larvae (p = 0.118,
unpaired Wilcoxon test for lower speed in mutants; Figure 3---figure
supplement 1B). \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae responded
in a graded manner to increases in pressure by upward swimming (Figure
3A; Figure 3---figure supplement 1C). However, their response was weaker
than the response of age-matched \emph{WT} larvae (Figure 3---figure
supplement 1C). An ANOVA comparison showed that a model considering the
genotype better explained the data than a model without this variable,
for either a simple or a polynomial linear regression model (p-values =
9.98e⁻⁰⁷ and 9.92e⁻⁰⁶, respectively). Ciliary beating prior to pressure
increase was not significantly different between
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} and WT larvae (p = 0.835, unpaired
Wilcoxon test for lower CBF in mutants; Figure 3---figure supplement
1D). Upon pressure increases, CBF in
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae showed a significant
increase to the three highest pressure levels tested (237.5 mb p =
0.014, 556 mb p = 9.7 E-05, 988 mb p = 6.35 E-05; one-tailed paired
t-test with Bonferroni correction testing for an increase in CBF; Figure
3B). \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae also showed
significant increases in max. ∆\%CBF as the pressure stimulus was
increased (Figure 3---figure supplement 1E; compare to the WT data in
Figure 3B), with no significant difference in the increase to WT larvae
(Figure 3---figure supplement 1F). In summary,
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae can still respond to
changes in pressure in a graded manner, but the response is weaker than
in \emph{WT} larvae, both at the population and at the single-larva
levels. This indicates that c-opsin-1 is not directly required for the
pressure response, but its absence leads to a weakened response to
pressure.

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure3.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 3.} \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae
show a weaker response to pressure and have structural defects in cPRC
cilia. (A) Maximum change in vertical displacement of \emph{WT} and
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} three-day-old larvae for each
pressure step-change tested. Data points from the same batch are joined
by lines. Larger open circles indicate the mean value. Thicker solid
lines show the regression model predictions. N= 7-9 (
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}), N = 8-10 ( \emph{WT}) batches.
(B) Max. CBF that individual \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}
larvae reached in the 30 s prior (\emph{Before}), or during the first 30
s of the indicated increase in pressure (\emph{Stimulus}). Data points
for the same larva are joined by lines. One-tailed paired t-test with
Bonferroni correction testing for an increase in CBF; all p-values are
shown. N = 10---17 larvae. (C-D) cPRC ciliary volume measured for each
pair of cPRC cilia on the left and right body sides in two-day-old
\emph{WT} and \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae. Volumes were
measured using the signal of the NIT-GC2 antibody (α-NIT-GC2). (C)
Maximum intensity projections of IF stainings used for quantifying cPRC
cilary volume. (D) cPRC ciliary volume distribution sorted by genotype
and body side. One-tailed unpaired t-test with Bonferroni correction
testing for a decrease in ciliary volume in mutant larvae. p-values
\textless{} 0.05 are shown. N = 9---10 ( \emph{WT}), 17---19
(\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}) larvae. (E) Morphology of cPRC
cilia in 3 day-old \emph{WT} (top row) and
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} (bottom row) larvae reconstructed
by serial EM. Reconstructions of cPRC cilia are shown in the left-most
panels. A representative micrograph of the EM data used for the
reconstructions is shown in the adjacent panels. Dashed squares in these
images mark the regions shown in the enlarged views to the right. Orange
arrowheads point to cilia with more than one microtubule dublets. In the
right-most panels, the branches of single cPRC cilia are coloured by
Strahler order (Str. order). Branches with higher Str. orders originate
closer to the basal body (bb). The remaining cPRC cilia are coloured in
grey. cb: cell body; n: nucleus; bb: basal body. Figure 3---source data
1 (A), Figure 1---source data 4 (B), Figure 3---source data 2 (D).}

\end{figure}%

\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{c-opsin-1} mutants have defects in
cPRC
cilia}{c-opsin-1 mutants have defects in cPRC cilia}}\label{c-opsin-1-mutants-have-defects-in-cprc-cilia}

The reduced response of \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae to
pressure may stem from morphological defects of the cPRC sensory cilia
in these mutants. We used stainings with acetylated tubulin and NIT-GC2,
an antibody specifically marking cPRC cilia (see Figure 2D) to measure
the volume of the ciliary compartment in \emph{WT} and
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae (Figure 3C; Figure
3---figure supplement 1G). Volumetric imaging in two-day-old larvae
stained with these antibodies revealed that the cPRC ciliary compartment
in \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae was significantly
smaller than in age-matched \emph{WT} larvae (p = 0.044 and 0.018 for
left and right ciliary compartments, one-tailed unpaired t-test with
Bonferroni correction; Figure 3D). In some cases, cPRC ciliary
compartments were drastically reduced, albeit never completely absent in
all four cells (Figure 3---figure supplement 1F). A reduced ciliary
compartment may underlie the weaker responses of
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae to pressure.

To further investigate the morphological defects of cPRC sensory cilia
in \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae, we reconstructed the
cPRC ciliary structure of a mutant larva using volume electron
microscopy. We compared this reconstruction to a volume EM datataset of
cPRC cilia from a three-day-old \emph{WT} larva previously reported
(Verasztó et al., 2018). The two \emph{WT} cPRCs reconstructed have 14
to 15 ramified cilia tightly wrapped on themselves (Figure 3E, top row,
Video 6). Branching occurs close to the basal body, soon after cilia
protrude from the cell body. Most branches inherit an individual
microtubule doublet. The 15 to 17 cilia of the two cPRCs reconstructed
in a \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larva revealed a more
sparsely packed structure (Figure 3E, bottom row; Figure 3---figure
supplement 1A, Video 7). Mutant cilia are not significantly shorter than
WT cPRC cilia (p = 0.076, Wilcoxon test for longer WT cilia, Figure 3F).
However, we noticed when comparing cross-sections of each genotype that
individual branches of mutant cPRC cilia often contained more than one
microtubule doublet (arrowheads in Figure 3E; Figure 3---figure
supplement 2A). This suggests that cPRC cilia of
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae have alterations in
branching morphology. We indeed found that the terminal branches of
cilia in the mutant are significantly shorter (p = 1.26 E-04 Wilcoxon
test for shorter branches in the mutant, Figure 3G, right-most plot),
while internal branches are longer than those in the \emph{WT} (p = 1.26
E-04; Wilcoxon test for longer branches in the mutant, Figure 3G, middle
plot). Basal branches also tended to be larger, but no statistically
significance can be concluded (p = 0.06, Wilcoxon test for longer
branches in the mutant, Figure 3G, left-most plot). This result supports
the former observation that branching occurs more distally to the basal
body in \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae. Longer internal
branches in mutant cPRC cilia would also explain the presence of ciliary
profiles with more than one microtubule doublet (Figure 3---figure
supplement 2A).

Overall, our physiological and genetic analyses suggest that the brain
cPRCs act as graded and fast-adapting pressure receptors. In
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae, the ciliary compartment is
smaller and shows morphological defects, revealing a genetic requirement
for c-opsin-1 in the establishment of the sensory compartment and
supporting the idea that the cPRC ciliary compartment is the site of
pressure transduction.

\subsection{Synaptic transmission from serotonergic ciliomotor neurons
mediates pressure-induced increases in ciliary
beating}\label{synaptic-transmission-from-serotonergic-ciliomotor-neurons-mediates-pressure-induced-increases-in-ciliary-beating}

The complete synaptic wiring diagram of the cPRCs was previously
reported from an electron microscopy volume of a three-day-old larva
(Figure 4A-B; Verasztó et al. (2018)). The shortest neuronal path from
cPRCs to the prototroch involves a feed-forward loop from the cPRCs to
two types of postsynaptic interneurons, the INNOS and the INRGWa cells
(Figure 4B). INRGWa cells in turn synapse on a pair of head serotonergic
ciliomotor neurons (Ser-h1). Ser-h1 cells directly innervate the
prototroch ciliary band and synapse on the MC head cholinergic
ciliomotor neuron (Figure 4B). Ser-h1 cells are thought to promote
ciliary beating by directly releasing serotonin onto the ciliary band
cells and indirectly by inhibiting the cholinergic MC neuron that is
required to arrest ciliary beating (Verasztó et al., 2017).

To directly test the involvement of the Ser-h1 cells in the pressure
response, we used a genetic strategy to inhibit synaptic release from
serotonergic neurons. We used transient transgenesis to drive the
expression of the synaptic inhibitor tetanus-toxin light chain (TeTxLC)
(Sweeney et al., 1995) under the promoter of \emph{tryptophan
hydroxylase} (\emph{TPH}), a marker of serotonergic neurons (Verasztó et
al., 2017). The \emph{TPH} promoter labels the head Ser-h1 and other
serotonergic cells including the Ser-tr1 trunk ciliomotor neurons. Of
the cells labelled with this promoter, only Ser-h1 is postsynaptic to
cPRCs and provides strong innervation to the prototroch cells and the MC
cell (Verasztó et al., 2017).

The construct (Figure 4C) drives the expression of both TeTxLC and an
HA-tagged palmitoylated tdTomato reporter, separated by P2A, a
self-cleaving peptide previously used in \emph{Platynereis}
(Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018). The mosaic expression of this construct
resulted in the labeling of different subsets of serotonergic neurons.
We selected animals showing labelling in Ser-h1 (most larvae were also
labelled in Ser-tr1 and other unidentified serotonergic cells). We
confirmed the expression of the transgene in Ser-h1 by immunostaining
against the HA-tag of Palmi-tdTomato (Figure 4D). Larvae expressing
TeTxLC in Ser-h1 showed an increase in CBF only at the highest pressure
used (988 mb p = 0.004; one-tailed paired t-test with Bonferroni
correction testing for an increase in CBF; Figure 4E, bottom row).
Larvae injected with a control plasmid expressing only Palmi-tdTomato
but not TeTxLC in Ser-h1 (Figure 4C) showed a significant increase in
CBF at the three highest pressure levels applied (237.5 mb p = 0.023,
556 mb p = 0.009, 988 mb p = 0.004; one-tailed paired t-test with
Bonferroni correction testing for an increase in CBF; Figure 4E, top
row; Figure 4---figure supplement 1A). The metric max. ∆\%CBF was not
significantly different between control and TeTxLC-injected larvae
(Figure 4---figure supplement 1B). These results indicate that
TeTxLC-mediated inhibition of Ser-h-1---albeit incomplete and in most
cases limited to one of the two cells---leads to a noticeable dampening
of the pressure response at the level of the ciliary band. This suggests
that synaptic release from serotonergic neurons is required to increase
ciliary beating upon pressure increase. Our data support the model that
Ser-h1 neurons, and no other serotonergic cells, are specifically
required for this response, because this cell type was labelled in all
animals tested and these cells directly innervate the prototroch.

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure4.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 4.} TeTxLC expression in Ser-h1 neurons inhibits
CBF increase during pressure. (A-B) Volume EM reconstruction (A) of the
cells in the cPRC synaptic circuit (B). cPRCs synpase in the middle of
the brain on both INNOS and INRGWa neurons. INRGWa cells synapse on
Ser-h1 neurons, which directly innervate the ciliary band and also
target the MC cell. Only the cells in the shortest path to the
prototroch are included. (C) Schematic of the gene constructs used to
test the role of Ser-h1 in the pressure response. The TPHp::tdT
construct drives expression of the reporter protein Palmi-tdTomato in
Ser-h1 and other serotonergic neurons. It was used as a control. The
TPHp::tdT-P2A-TeTxLC construct expresses Palmi-tdTomato and the synaptic
blocker TeTxLC as a fusion that gets post-translationally self-cleaved
by the P2A peptide. (D) Maximum intensity projections of a larva
injected with the TPHp::tdT-P2A-TeTxLC construct and stained with α-HA.
Ser-h1 was labelled in this animal. Anterior view. (E) Max. CBF that
single larvae reached in the 30 s prior (\emph{Before}), or during the
first 30 s of the indicated increase in pressure (\emph{Stimulus}). Data
points for the same larva are joined by lines. Larvae were injected
either with the control plasmid TPHp::tdT (top row, N = 14-16 larvae),
or with the TPHp::tdT-P2A-TeTxLC plasmid (bottom row, N = 13-16 larvae).
One-tailed paired t-test with Bonferroni correction testing for an
increase in CBF; p-values \textless{} 0.05 are shown. Figure 4---source
data 1 (E).}

\end{figure}%

\subsection{Discussion}\label{discussion}

This work provides insights into the neuronal mechanisms of pressure
sensation and response in a marine planktonic larva. Our findings
suggest that increases in pressure, either due to the larva's own
actions (sinking or diving) or to downwelling currents, lead to the
activation of the sensory cPRCs (Figure 5). The activation is
proportional to the magnitude of pressure change and leads to the
activation of the downstream circuit that converges onto the Ser-h1
neurons and ultimately leads to increased ciliary beating. The Ser-h1
cells could secrete serotonin (5-HT) onto the ciliary band, which from
pharmacological assays is known to increase ciliary beat frequency
(Verasztó et al., 2017). Ser-h1 neurons may simultaneously inhibit the
cholinergic ciliomotoneuron MC neuron (Verasztó et al., 2017), thereby
preventing ciliary arrests while the larva tries to compensate for the
increased pressure. Upon a decrease in pressure, three-day-old (but not
two-day-old) larvae also show an off-response characterised by downward
swimming. We have not analysed in detail the neuronal mechanisms of this
response but it may depend on an inverted activation of the cPRC
circuit, as happens during UV avoidance (Jokura et al., 2023). Pressure
`on' and pressure `off' thus induce behavioural responses with opposite
sign such that larvae move to compensate for the pressure change. The
response is directional along the pressure gradient (even if larvae do
not detect the gradient but temporal changes) and we refer to it as
barotaxis.

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure5.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 5.} The pressure response as a depth-retention
mechanism mediated by the ciliary photoreceptor-cell circuit. (Top)
\emph{Platynereis} larvae maintain their position in the water column by
controlling the beating dynamics of the ciliary band (t = 0, no net
change in depth, ∆ depth = 0). A sufficiently rapid increase in depth
(at t = 1) caused by intrinsic or extrinsic factors would lead to an
increase in hydrostatic pressure. The change in depth relative to the
previous state (∆ depth 1 or ∆ depth 2) will be perceived by the larva,
which will try to counteract this change by increasing ciliary beat
frequency of the prototroch, leading to upward swimming (at t = 2) until
the pressure returns to the level previously experienced. A smaller
change in pressure (∆ depth 1) will lead to a smaller increase in CBF
(CBF 1, light green arrow) than a larger change (CBF 2). (Middle)
Changes in pressure are sensed by the cPRCs. These sensory cells are
activated in a graded manner according to the change in pressure.
(Bottom) cPRCs signal via a postsynaptic circuit including the INRGWa
and INNOS interneurons to the Ser-h1 neurons. Activation of these
serotonergic neurons is required to increase ciliary beating directly on
the prototroch cells and indirectly by inhibiting the MC neuron (CBF 1
or CBF2) proportional to the change in pressure.}

\end{figure}%

Our proposed depth-retention model complements a previously reported
spectral depth-gauge mechanism in the \emph{Platynereis} larva based on
its ability to respond to UV and green light (Verasztó et al., 2018). As
previously hypothesized for other planktonic larvae (Sulkin, 1984),
pressure sensing in \emph{Platynereis} may operate through negative
feedback to retain a particular depth, while light as a more variable
stimulus could drive intensity and wavelength-dependent changes in the
vertical position of larvae. In future, it will be interesting to
explore how responses tp pressure and to directional (Randel et al.,
2014) and non-directional light cues (Verasztó et al., 2018) across
wavelengths and intensities interact to guide larval swimming.

Our unexpected finding that ciliary photoreceptors, previously shown to
be sensitive to UV and green light (Verasztó et al., 2018), are also
activated by pressure increase suggests that the integration of light
and pressure could begin at the sensory level in a single cell type. UV
light activates the cPRCs to induce downward swimming while pressure
increases induce upward swimming. The calcium dynamics of cPRCs depends
on the stimulus applied and may therefore underlie the mechanism by
which the cells decode and transmit a sensory signal to the downstream
circuit. UV induces a transient increase and subsequent drop in
Ca\textsuperscript{2+} levels followed by a sharp NO-dependent increase
that persists even after UV stimulation ends (Jokura et al., 2023). In
contrast, pressure induces a transient increase in
Ca\textsuperscript{2+} levels that terminates with the stimulus. These
observations suggest that the integration of light and mechanical cues
already occurs at the sensory-cell level. The different activation
dynamics may lead to the release of different neurotransmitter and
neuromodulator cocktails (cPRCs are cholinergic, GABAergic, adrenergic
and peptidergic (Jokura et al., 2023; Randel et al., 2014;
Tessmar-Raible et al., 2007; Williams et al., 2017)) and different
activation patterns in the postsynaptic cells. Similar integration can
occur in \emph{Drosophila} larvae, where UV/blue light and noxious
mechanical stimuli are detected by the same sensory neuron that together
with other cells converges onto a circuit processing multisensory
stimuli (Imambocus et al., 2022). In \emph{Platynereis}, other sensory
cells (e.g., the SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp} cells; Figure 2---figure
supplement 1) may contribute to distinguishing the nature of the
stimulus.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms by which cPRCs sense and transduce
changes in hydrostatic pressure deserve further enquiry. The mechanism
may involve the differential compression of microtubules along each
ciliary branch (Li et al., 2022; Nasrin et al., 2021), or differential
displacement of fluid inside the cilium (Bell, 2008). The cPRCs have a
unique multiciliated structure and are embedded in a protected
environment different from fluid-exposed cilia such as hydrodynamic
mechanosensory cilia (Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018). These features are
hard to reconcile with current models of ciliary mechanosensation (e.g.,
see review by R. Ferreira et al. (2019)). Instead, the mechanism of
pressure sensation at work in cPRCs may share more similarities with
non-neuronal cells detecting pressure, such as chondrocytes (Pattappa et
al., 2019) and trabecular meshwork cells (Luo et al., 2014).

The molecular mechanisms of pressure detection remain unclear.
Components of the phototransduction cascade may be involved in pressure
sensation. Our results indicate that the ciliary opsin required for
detecting UV light is not essential for pressure sensation. This
molecule rather indirectly affects the ability of cPRCs to sense
pressure by contributing to the development or maintenance of a ramified
ciliary sensory structure. The structural role of opsins for shaping
ciliary cell morphology has also been reported in other photoreceptor
and mechanoreceptor cells (Lem et al., 1999; Zanini et al., 2018). The
direct transducer of pressure may be a TRP channel. TRP channels can
signal downstream of opsins in phototransduction cascades and have been
postulated as the ultimate integrators of sensory stimuli (Liu and
Montell, 2015). Mechanosensitivity has also recently been reported for
vertebrate rods (Bocchero et al., 2020), including the activation of
these ciliary photoreceptors by pressure (Pang et al., 2021). The
cellular and molecular mechanisms behind this sensitivity are still
unclear, but TRP or Piezo channels were suggested to be involved
(Bocchero et al., 2020).

The mechanism by which cPRCs detect pressure in \emph{Platynereis} may
also characterise the few other cases of pressure sensors based on
ciliated sensory cells (the crab statocyst, and the dog hair cells)
(Fraser and Macdonald, 1994; Fraser and Shelmerdine, 2002).
Multiciliated pressure receptors may be widespread in zooplankton, as
cells with a morphology similar to the cPRCs have been observed in
species across the animal phylogeny (Hernandez-Nicaise, 1984.; Baatrup,
1982; Eakin and Kuda, 1970), reviewed in (Bezares-Calderón et al., 2019)
). Some of these cells have long been hypothesized to function as
pressure sensors. To our knowledge, this study provides the first
functional evidence for the role of multiciliated sensory cells in
pressure sensation.

cPRCs are part of an ancient neurosecretory centre with putative roles
in circadian regulation of locomotion (Tessmar-Raible et al., 2007;
Tosches et al., 2014; Williams et al., 2017). Besides light, pressure
can also regularly change as a result of dial vertial migration in
planktonic stages or tides in settled benthic stages. One of the
original components in the first neurosecretory centres may thus have
been multimodal sensory cells keeping track of and integrating changes
in periodic cues such as light and pressure that allowed to coordinate
physiology and behaviour with the natural rhythms.

\section{Materials and Methods}\label{materials-and-methods}

\subsection{Key Resources Table}\label{key-resources-table}

\begin{table}
\centering
\begin{tblr}[         %% tabularray outer open
]                     %% tabularray outer close
{                     %% tabularray inner open
colspec={Q[]Q[]Q[]Q[]Q[]},
}                     %% tabularray inner close
\toprule
Reagent type (species) or resource & Designation & Source or reference & Identifiers & Additional information \\ \midrule %% TinyTableHeader
strain, strain background (Platynereis dumerilii) & wild type & Marine Invertebrate Culture Unit, University of Exeter & NCBITaxon:6359 &  \\
strain, strain background (P. dumerilii) & c-opsin1Δ8/Δ8 knockout & DOI:10.7554/eLife.36440 & NCBITaxon:6359 & Knockout generated by TALEN-induced gene editing \\
transfected construct (mRNA) & GCaMP6s mRNA & DOI:10.7554/eLife.02730 &  & 1 mg/ml \\
transfected construct (mRNA) & 3xHA-Palmi-tdTomato mRNA & This paper &  & < 0.2 ng/µl \\
antibody & Monoclonal Anti-Tubulin,
Acetylated antibody
produced in mouse & Sigma-Aldrich &     Cat#:T6793,
RRID:AB_477585 & (1:250) \\
antibody & Polyclonal NIT-GC2 antibody, produced in rabbit & DOI:10.7554/eLife.91258.1 & aNIT-GC2 & 5 mg/ml \\
antibody & anti-5-HT, produced in rabit & ImmunoStar & Cat# 20080, RRID:AB_572263 & 2 mg/ml \\
antibody & Monoclonal Anti-HA antibody
produced in mouse & Cell SignalingTechnology & HA-Tag (6E2), Cat #2367,RRID:AB_10691311 & (1:250) \\
antibody & Monoclonal Anti-HA antibody
produced in rabbit & Cell SignalingTechnology & HA-Tag (C29F4) Cat #3724, RRID:AB_1549585 & (1:250) \\
antibody & 
Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Cross-Adsorbed Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor™ 488
produced in rabbit & ThermoFisher Scientific & Cat#: A-11008, RRID:AB_143165 & (1:250) \\
antibody & F(ab')2-Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Cross-Adsorbed Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor™ 546 & ThermoFisher Scientific & Cat# A-11018, RRID:AB_2534085 & (1:250) \\
Commercial
assay or kit & mMESSAGE
mMACHINE T7
ULTRA Transcription Kit & Ambion,
ThermoFisher Scientific & Cat#:AM1345 &  \\
recombinant DNA reagent & pUC57-TPHp3xHA-Palmi-tdTomato-P2A-TeTxLC (plasmid) & This paper & pLB316 & injected at 250 ng/µl in water \\
recombinant DNA reagent & pUC57-TPHp3xHA-Palmi-tdTomato (plasmid) & DOI:10.7554/eLife.26000 & pLB253 & injected at 250 ng/µl in water \\
recombinant DNA reagent & pUC57-T7-RPP2-3xHA-Palmi-tdTomato (plasmid) & This paper & pLB260 & injected at 250 ng/µl in water \\
recombinant DNA reagent & pUC57-T7-RPP2-GCaMP6s (plasmid) & DOI:10.7554/eLife.02730 & pLB112 & injected at 250 ng/µl in water \\
recombinant DNA reagent & pGEMTEZ-TeTxLC & DOI:10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00224-7 & Addgene plasmid # 32640, RRID:Addgene_32640 & Richard Axel & Joseph Gogos & C. Ron Yu \\
chemical compound, drug & Ficoll PM70 & Sigma-Aldrich & cat# F2878 & -20% \\
chemical compound, drug & Formaldehyde Aqueous Solution (Paraformaldehyde Aqueous Solution) EM Grade & Electron Microscopy Sciences & cat# 15710 & -4% \\
chemical compound, drug & low-melting agarose & Hampton Research & LM AgaroseTM, Cat# HR8-092 & (2.5-3%) \\
software, algorithm & Fiji & NIH & RRID:SCR_002285 &  \\
software, algorithm & CATMAID & DOI:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btp266 & RRID:SCR_006278 &  \\
other & Wormglu & GluStitch Inc &  &  \\
\bottomrule
\end{tblr}
\end{table}

\subsection{Animal culture}\label{animal-culture}

\emph{Platynereis dumerilii} worms were cultured in a laboratory
facility following established protocols. Larvae were raised in 0.22
µm-filtered artificial sea water (fASW, Tropic Marin) at 37 ppm and kept
at 18°C in a 16 h/8 h light-dark cycle. The genotype of each batch made
from crosses of \emph{c-ops-1} KO mutant
(\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}) worms was confirmed using the
primer set reported in Verasztó et al. (2018).

\subsection{Behavioural assays}\label{behavioural-assays}

\subsubsection{Design and assembly of pressure
chambers}\label{design-and-assembly-of-pressure-chambers}

\paragraph{Large pressure chamber}\label{large-pressure-chamber}

The chamber's construction was based on an early design by (Lincoln and
Gilchrist, 1970). In brief, it consisted of a central core of 110 mm (H)
x 90 mm (W) x 20 mm (D) with window openings on the lateral, front and
bottom sides. Each of the openings had a 12 mm crevice to accept
custom-made acrylic
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Data/Mechanical_drawings/Zeichnung_Fenster_Bezares2.pdf}{plastic
windows} (Theodor Schmid GmbH, Tübingen). The windows were fitted into
the crevices each with 3ßmm-thick silicon rubber gaskets and fastened
with aluminum plates and screws on top of them. The central working
dimensions of the fully assembled chamber are 100 mm x 70 mm x 10 mm (70
ml). A 10 mm diameter threaded opening was bored at the back of the
chamber to which a shutoff valve was connected. The design was produced
using Blender (blender.org) and translated to a proprietary CAD-based
software (eMachineShop, USA;
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Data/Mechanical_drawings/Aluminium_Chamber.blend}{Blender
file},
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Data/Mechanical_drawings/Aluminium_Chamber.ems}{EMS
file}). The chamber was made of anodized aluminum alloy 6061 T6 using
CNC machining techniques (eMachineShop, USA). The final threading was
made in a workshop (Hans Mast GmbH, Tübingen).

\paragraph{Small pressure chamber}\label{small-pressure-chamber}

A small chamber was used for experiments with fewer larvae per batch.
This chamber was also utilized for the ciliary dynamics experiments (see
below). The design followed that of the big chamber, except that this
chamber had acrylic windows on all sides. The central working dimensions
of the fully assembled chamber are 40 mm x 30 mm x 10 mm (12 ml). It was
machined in aluminum by the EMBL mechanical workshop in Heidelberg.

\subsubsection{Behavioural experiments}\label{behavioural-experiments}

A mix of age-matched batches of larvae from different crosses were added
to the pressure chamber. The chamber was not filled completely to
minimize water disturbances upon the addition of air. Bubbles adhered to
the edges and walls of the chamber were removed with a plastic mixer.
Behaviour was recorded in effective darkness with near-infrared LED
stripes (850 nm, cat\#: 15412085A9000 Wurth Elektronik, Germany) placed
on each side of the chamber. A CCD camera (DMK31BF03 or DMK41BF02,
Imaging source, Germany) was placed in front of the chamber at a
distance sufficient to capture the entire behavioural arena in the field
of view.. The camera was triggered in most experiments at 10 fps via TTL
communication with an Arduino microcontroller (Arduino Uno R3, Arduino,
Italy).

The chamber was connected to a compressed air tank (Zero Grade Air,
Hydrocarbons R\&A,270029-AZ-C,BOC) using locally sourced fittings and
hoses. The flow of air into and out of the chamber was controlled with a
pair of solenoid valves (SV, Cat\# 293478, Burkert, Germany, and
ST-DA018S030F-012DC, JP Fluid Control, The Netherlands). Pressure was
recorded across each trial with either a 50, 100, 250 or 1000 mb
pressure transducer (cat\# 8285701, 8285713, 8285726, 7975043, RS-PRO,
UK) with a voltage output linearly related to pressure. The pressure
reading feedbacks to the SVs via the Arduino to maintain a constant
pressure level, updating the reading faster than the acquisition speed
(Arduino scripts used:
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/PressureControl/sketch_WorkingScript_1_twovalvesNOavgUVNOvalvedelayLogicPressur/sketch_WorkingScript_1_twovalvesNOavgUVNOvalvedelayLogicPressur.ino}{\texttt{sketch\_WorkingScript\_1\_twovalvesNOavgUVNOvalvedelayLogicPressur.ino}}
for the 50, 100, and 250 mb transducers and
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/PressureControl/PressureProgram_1000mb/PressureProgram_1000mb.ino}{\texttt{PressureProgram\_1000mb.ino}}
for the 1000 mb transducer). For the longer-term pressure adaptation
experiments, the same setup was used, but a voltage equivalent to 100 mb
or 500 mb was used as basal pressure and kept constant. A manual
proportional valve downstream of the solenoid valve was used to adjust
the rate of linear increase in pressure.

To increase pressure using a column of water, a flexible hose filled
with sea water was screwed to the pressure chamber pre-loaded with the
larvae under water to avoid introducing air into the system. The hose
had ball valves at both ends (see Fig Supplement 2C). The valve closer
to the chamber was closed after connecting the hose to the chamber. The
hose was straightened to the desired height (an equivalence of 1 cm to 1
mb was assumed), and the upper valve was opened at this moment. To
increase pressure inside the chamber the lower valve was opened. To
release pressure the hose was lowered to the level of the chamber.
Pressure levels between 10 and 100 mb with 10 mb increments were chosen
and applied in a randomized order.

\subsubsection{Stimulation protocol}\label{stimulation-protocol}

The general protocol consisted of recording the vertical swimming
behaviour of larvae for 10 s before pressure was increased as a step
function of time. Pressure was held at a set value for a defined amount
of time; stimulus duration was in most cases 60 s. A list of target
pressure values or rates of pressure increase/decrease were applied to
the same group of larvae in randomized order (List randomization,
\url{random.org}). A resting period of 5 to 10 min was allowed between
trials.

\subsubsection{Data analysis}\label{data-analysis}

Tracks of swimming larvae (in XY coordinates) were extracted from the
recordings using a modified version of the script by Gühmann et al
(Gühmann et al., 2015)
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/BatchBehaviour/BatchBehaviourTrackExtraction.ijm}{\texttt{BatchBehaviourTrackExtraction.ijm}}).
Each recording was split into one-second fragments (in most cases 10
frames long), from which tracks spanning the full second were obtained
with the
\href{https://valelab4.ucsf.edu/~nstuurman/IJplugins/MTrack2.html}{MTracK2})
plugin (Nico Stuurman) and formatted into a table using R
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/BatchBehaviour/ReadMtrack2files.R}{\texttt{ReadMtrack2files.R}}).

The track coordinates were used to calculate a range of metrics (script
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/BatchBehaviour/MeasuresTracks.R}{\texttt{MeasuresTracks.R}})
according to the formulae in Table 1.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 2\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2917}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 2\tabcolsep) * \real{0.7083}}@{}}
\caption{\textbf{Table 1.} Swimming metrics}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Metric
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Formula
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Metric
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Formula
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
Average vertical displacement &
\(\frac{\sum_{j=1}^{\#Tracks}\sum_{i=1}^{\#Frames}(Y_{j\,i+1}-Y_{j\,i})}{\#Tracks \times \#Frames}\times Frame\,rate \times mm\,px^{-1}\) \\
Vertical movement &
\(\frac{\sum_{j=1}^{\#Tracks}\frac{(Y_{j\,fin.\,pos}-Y_{j\,init.\,pos})}{\#Frames_{j}}}{\#Tracks}\times Frame\,rate \times mm\,px^{-1}\) \\
Average speed &
\(\frac{\sum_{j=1}^{\#Tracks}\sum_{i=1}^{\#Frames}\sqrt{(X_{j\,i+1}-X_{j\,i})^2+(Y_{j\,i+1}-Y_{j\,i})^2}} {\#Tracks \times \#Frames}\times{Frame\,rate\times mm\,px^{-1}}\) \\
Average straightness vertical path &
\(\frac{\sum_{j=1}^{\#Tracks}\sum_{i=1}^{\#Frames}\frac{(Y_{j\,i+1}-Y_{j\,i})}{\sqrt{(X_{j\,i+1}-X_{j\,i})^2+(Y_{j\,i+1}-Y_{j\,i})^2}}}{\#Tracks \times \#Frames}\) \\
Straightness index &
\(\sum_{j=1}^{\#Tracks}\frac{\sqrt{(X_{j\,fin.\,pos}-X_{j\,init.\,pos})^2 + (Y_{j\,fin.\,pos}-Y_{j\,init.\,pos})^2 }} {\sum_{i=1}^{\#Frames}\sqrt{(X_{j\,i+1}-X_{j\,i})^2+(Y_{j\,i+1}-Y_{j\,i})^2}}/{\#Tracks}\) \\
\end{longtable}

A maximum of 400 tracks per file were analysed. Only data containing
more than 50 tracks for single-batch experiments, or by 100 or more
tracks for experiments using a mix of multiple batches were used for
analysis.

Where indicated, results were averaged across trials, and the value
normalized relative to average displacement prior to stimulus onset.
Maximal values were obtained from smoothed triangular averages (i.e.~a
single moving average calculated twice, each with a window size of 5).
For the long-exposure experiments, the percent increase in pressure at a
time point \(t\) was calculated as follows:
\(\%pressure,increment_t = \frac{(pressure_t + 1000)*100}{pressure\_{prior}+1000}-100\)

assuming the ambient pressure was \textasciitilde1000 mb.

Larval distribution along the vertical axis of the pressure vessel was
obtained by dividing the image into 5 bins of equal size and counting
the number of particles (after thresholding) in each bin. The script
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/BatchBehaviour/ScriptParticleCounter.ijm}{\texttt{ScriptParticleCounter.ijm}}
was used for that purpose.

\subsection{Ciliary dynamics
experiments}\label{ciliary-dynamics-experiments}

\subsubsection{Behavioural setup}\label{behavioural-setup}

To measure the ciliary dynamics of the main ciliary band (prototroch),
two-day-old larvae were tethered from the posterior end to a glass
cuvette (15 mm x 15 mm x 4 mm) with non-toxic glue (Wormglu, GluStitch
Inc). The cuvette was inserted into a custom-made 3D printer adaptor and
fitted into an air-tight vessel (small chamber, see above). The vessel
was connected to the Arduino-controlled system of solenoid valves and
electronic transducer used for the batch experiments. For experiments
with injected larvae, fluorescein and reporter signals were confirmed
prior to the experiment, but after gluing the larva to the cuvette.
Randomized step increases in pressure were applied with a resting
interval of 10 min between trials. Larvae in the device were imaged with
an AxioZoom V.16 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Germany) fitted with a 2.3x
objective under effective darkness (i.e.~filtering the light from a
CL9000 LED lamp with a long-pass filter, cat\# 435700-9025-000, Carl
Zeiss Microscopy, Germany). Recordings were acquired at 200 Hz with an
ORCA Flash 4.0 camera (C11440-22CU, Hamamatsu) using µManager (Edelstein
et al., 2010).

\subsubsection{Ciliary beat frequency
measurements}\label{ciliary-beat-frequency-measurements}

Kymographs of the entire ciliary band obtained with an ImageJ macro
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/CBFmeasurement/CBFrollingAvgSubKimoUnsup.ijm}{\texttt{CBFrollingAvgSubKimoUnsup.ijm}})
were used to measure the ciliary beat frequency (CBF) and the beating
state across each trial. The CBF was calculated by adjusting a ridge
wave to the wavelet transform of the signal using the ridge extraction
mode (bandpass filter: 5--22 Hz) of the MODA numerical toolbox (Iatsenko
et al., 2019; Iatsenko et al., 2016), implemented with a Matlab script
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/CBFmeasurement/batchprocessKymographs.m}{\texttt{batchprocessKymographs.m}}).
A Forward Fourier Transform (FFT) for each time unit was also calculated
from the data with the ImageJ macro, but it was not adequate to capture
the time-varying frequency in the data. Nonetheless, the FFTs provided
an indirect way of identifying ciliary arrests. The following formula
was used to measure CBF from the FFTs: \[ CBF=FPS/R \]

where FPS is the recording rate, and R is the radius value in the FFT
power spectrum image. Ciliary arrests corresponded to R values smaller
than 8 or greater than 17 (corresponding to CBF between 11.8 and 25 for
200 fps). An R script
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/CBFmeasurement/CBFcalculation.R}{\texttt{CBFcalculation.R}})
code was used to integrate pressure logs of each trial and the CBFs
measured from wavelet and Fourier transforms, as well as to record the
beating state of the band for each second of each trial.

The CBF extracted from the wavelet transforms were averaged using a
triangular moving average. The maximum CBF (max. CBF) from these
smoothed data obtained for each period (i.e.~before, during and after
stimulus) of each trial was used for measuring significant changes in
CBF. The percentage change in max.CBF during the stimulus period,
\%∆CBF, was defined as follows:
\(\%\Delta CBF= (\frac{CBF - meanCBF_{prior}}{meanCBF_{prior}})\times 100\)
, where \(meanCBF_{prior}\) is the average CBF (after applying the
rolling average) before stimulus onset.

\subsection{Calcium imaging}\label{calcium-imaging}

\subsubsection{Imaging setup}\label{imaging-setup}

Two-day-old or three-day-old larvae injected with a mix of
\emph{GCaMP6s} (\textasciitilde1 µg/µl) and
\emph{Palmitoylated-tdTomato} mRNA ( \textless{} 0.2 ng/µl; see
\hyperref[microinjection-and-generation-of-plasmid-constructs-and-mrna]{Microinjection
and generation of plasmid constructs and mRNA} section) were embedded in
\textasciitilde2.7\% low-melting agarose (Hampton Research, Cat\#
HR8-092) with an anterior to posterior orientation and placed on a ø25
mm coverslip (Epredia, Cat\# CB00250RAC33MNZ0). A water-tight enclosure
around the agarose pad was adhered with Vaseline® Jelly to the
coverslip. \textasciitilde120 µl fASW were added to the enclosure to
keep the larva under water during the experiment. The preparation was
inserted in the central cavity of a custom-made acrylic chamber
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Data/Mechanical_drawings/Microscopy_pressure_chamber.step}{STEP
file} and
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Data/Mechanical_drawings/Microscopy_pressure_chamber.pdf}{Mechanical
drawing file}) and firmly held with an aluminium disk (\textasciitilde3
mm thick) screwed into the chamber. A silicone gasket was used to reduce
air leakages. The chamber's pipeline was plugged into the compressed air
system shown in Figure 1A to control pressure levels.

\subsubsection{Image acquisition and
analysis}\label{image-acquisition-and-analysis}

Z-stacks and time-lapse (TL) recordings were acquired with an inverted
\href{http://biosciences.exeter.ac.uk/bioimaging/equipment/light/zeisslsm880airyscan/}{Zeiss
LSM880 confocal microscope} with the 488 nm argon laser set at 1\%
intensity, and the He 543 laser at 0.5\% with a 40x water objective
(421767-9971-790, Carl Zeiss Microscopy). Z-stacks of the entire larva
were acquired immediately before, during and after increasing pressure
to \textasciitilde750 mb. TLs were acquired at \textasciitilde4.85 Hz
for 120 s. Randomized step increases in pressure were applied for 60 s
after recording basal activity for 30 s. The change in focus in TL
recordings induced by the increase in pressure was corrected by
automatically shifting the recording plane to the predicted new focal
plane as soon as pressure started increasing, followed by stabilization
of the imaging plane with an infrared light-based system
(DefiniteFocus2, Carl Zeiss Microscopy). The same procedure was applied
when pressure was brought back to ambient levels.

Z-stacks acquired before, during and after stimulus were aligned with
Fijiyama (Fernandez and Moisy, 2020) using the tdTomato signal as a
reference. This strategy was also used to correlate cells in Z-stacks
before and after immunostaining (but using isotropic deformation). X-Y
shifts in TL recordings were corrected using descriptor-based series
registration (Preibisch et al., 2010), followed by measurement of the
signal intensity in user-defined ROIs across the TL with an ImageJ
script
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/CaImaging/ExtractionIntensityValsTomGC.ijm}{\texttt{ExtractionIntensityValsTomGC.ijm}}).
A corrected change in fluorescence ∆R/R ((Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018;
Böhm et al., 2016)) based on both the GCaMP6s and the tdTomato signals
was used to quantify neuronal activity (implemented in
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/CaImaging/GCaMP_TLanalysis.R}{\texttt{GCaMP\_TLanalysis.R}}).

\subsection{Microinjection and generation of plasmid constructs and
mRNA}\label{microinjection-and-generation-of-plasmid-constructs-and-mrna}

\emph{Platynereis} embryos were microinjected with mRNA or plasmid
constructs following a modified version of the original protocol
(Ackermann et al., 2005). \emph{mRNA} was synthesized with the mMESSAGE
mMACHINE T7 Transcription Kit (Ambion, Cat\# AM1344) and eluted in
RNAse-free water. The plasmid used to synthesize \emph{GCaMP6s} mRNA was
previously reported
(\href{https://benchling.com/jekelylab/f/lib_sdvdcR5P-plasmidsstock_lbdb_jekelylab/seq_HRSlbW3F-puc57-t7-rpp25utr-gcamp6sasci-agei_c1/edit}{pLB112},
pUC57-T7-RPP2-GCaMP6-RPP2 in (Randel et al., 2014)).The
\emph{Palmitoylated tdTomato} (Palmi-tdTom) construct
(pUC57-T7-RPP2-Palmi-3xHA-tdTom-RPP2 or
\href{https://benchling.com/jekelylab/f/lib_sdvdcR5P-plasmidsstock_lbdb_jekelylab/seq_KpQNaGLw-plb260/edit}{pLB260})
used to syntesize \emph{Palmi-tdTom} mRNA was generated by subcloning
the \emph{Palmi-tdTom} ORF (previously reported in (Bezares-Calderón et
al., 2018)) into the same vector used for \emph{GCaMP6s} mRNA
production.

The TPHp::Palmi-tdTomato-P2A-TeTxLC
(\href{https://benchling.com/jekelylab/f/lib_sdvdcR5P-plasmidsstock_lbdb_jekelylab/seq_byQ18T5O-puc57-bamhi-tphp-asci-palmi-3xha-tdtomato-agei-p2a-noti-tetxlc-paci/edit}{pLB316})
was generated by subcloning the \emph{TeTxLC} ORF amplified from
pGEMTEZ-TeTxLC into a plasmid encoding the fused Palmi-tdTomato and the
P2A self-cleaving peptide sequence
(\href{https://benchling.com/jekelylab/f/lib_sdvdcR5P-plasmidsstock_lbdb_jekelylab/seq_mdeLSOGI-plb243/edit}{pLB243}
or pUC57-T7-RPP2-tdTomato-P2A-GCaMP6 in (Bezares-Calderón et al., 2018),
followed by sub-cloning the entire ORF downstream of the \emph{TPHp}
sequence (Verasztó et al., 2017). This plasmid or the control plasmid
\emph{TPHp::Palmi-tdTomato}
(\href{https://benchling.com/jekelylab/f/lib_sdvdcR5P-plasmidsstock_lbdb_jekelylab/seq_oLuEhx86-plb253/edit}{pLB253},
previously described; (Verasztó et al., 2017)) were co-injected with 5
µg/ml dextran fluorescein (D1821, ) at 250 ng/µl in water.
pGEMTEZ-TeTxLC was a gift from Richard Axel \& Joseph Gogos \& C. Ron Yu
(Addgene plasmid \# \href{http://n2t.net/addgene:32640}{32640} ;
RRID:Addgene\_32640).

\subsection{Whole mount
immunochemistry}\label{whole-mount-immunochemistry}

Whole mount immunostaining was carried out as previously described
(Verasztó et al., 2017). Larvae were fixed in 4\% formaldehyde made from
a 16\% stock (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Cat\#15710) diluted in PBS
(NaCl: 137 mM, KCl: 2.7 mM, Na\textsubscript{2}HPO\textsubscript{4}: 10
mM KH\textsubscript{2}PO\textsubscript{4}: 1.8 mM) + 0.1 \% Tween for 15
min at RT. Larvae used after Ca²⁺ imaging and for assessment of the cPRC
cilia volume were incubated overnight at 4°C with a polyclonal rabbit
NIT-GC2 antibody at 5 µg/ml, and in some cases combined with a rabbit
anti-5HT (serotonin) at 2 µg/ml (ImmunoStar Cat\# 20080,
RRID:AB\_572263). Depending on the aim of the staining, larvae were
counterstained with either a mouse monoclonal anti-HA tag antibody (,
Cell SignalingTechnology, HA-Tag (6E2), Cat \#2367,RRID:AB\_10691311) or
with a mouse monoclonal anti-acetylated tubulin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich,
Cat\# T6793, RRID:AB\_477585) at 1:250 dilution. Plasmid-injected larvae
were also counterstained with the anti-acetylated tubulin antibody and
with a rabbit monoclonal anti-HA tag antibody (Cell SignalingTechnology,
HA-Tag (C29F4) Cat \#3724, RRID:AB\_1549585). Samples were incubated
overnight at 4°C with 1:250 dilutions of the anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat\#: A-11008, RRID:AB\_143165), anti-mouse
F(ab) fragment Alexa Fluor 546 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat\#: A-11018,
RRID:AB\_2534085) secondary antibodies, and stained with 500 ng/ml DAPI
for 15 minutes at RT.

\subsection{cPRCs morphology
assessment}\label{cprcs-morphology-assessment}

\subsubsection{Light microscopy
analysis}\label{light-microscopy-analysis}

Z-stacks of larvae stained with the cPRC cilia antibody were acquired
with equal acquisition settings and were processed with the ImageJ
\href{https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/plugins/track/objects.html}{3D Object
Counter} (Cordelires et al) plugin through the
\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/cPRCmorphology/VolumeCalc.ijm}{\texttt{VolumeCalc.ijm}}
script. A threshold intensity that included the entire ciliary structure
was manually adjusted for each scan, filtering out structures with less
than 1000 voxels. The volumes thus obtained were imported and quantified
in R
(\href{https://github.com/JekelyLab/Bezares_et_al_2023_Pressure/blob/main/Code/cPRCmorphology/VolumecPRCanalysis.R}{\texttt{VolumecPRCanalysis.R}}).

\subsubsection{Electron Microscopy
analysis}\label{electron-microscopy-analysis}

\paragraph{Sample preparation}\label{sample-preparation}

\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae used for serial SEM (sSEM)
were mounted in 20\% Ficoll PM70 (Sigma, cat\# F2878) and high-pressure
frozen (HPM Live-µ, Labtech). Samples were then dehydrated by freeze
substitution using a standard procedure (McDONALD and WEBB, 2011) with
modifications of the fixation solution (1\% osmium tetroxide + 0.5\% UA
+ 0.5\% GA + 3\% H\textsubscript{2}0). Fixed larvae were embedded in
epoxy (EMBED 812/DMP-30, cat\#14120, Electron Microscopy Sciences) and
sectioned at \textasciitilde70 nm using a microtome (UC7, Leica)
equipped with a diamond knife (histo Jumbo 45° cat\#HI8592, DiATOME).
Image acquisition was done by SEM (GeminiSEM 500, Zeiss) using an energy
selective backscatter detector. Sections were elastically aligned with
TrakEM2 (Cardona et al., 2012). cPRC cilia were reconstructed in CATMAID
(Saalfeld et al., 2009).

This manuscript was written in RMarkdown (\emph{Dynamic documents with r
and knitr, second edition}, 2015).

\subsection{CRediT authorship contribution
statement}\label{credit-authorship-contribution-statement}

\textbf{Luis Alberto Bezares Calderón} : Conceptualization, Data
curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources,
Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing -- original draft, Writing
-- review \& editing; \textbf{Reza Shahidi} : Investigation,
Methodology, Resources; \textbf{Gáspár Jékely}: Conceptualization, Data
curation, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Software,
Supervision, Visualization, Writing -- original draft, Writing -- review
\& editing.

\subsection{Acknowledgements}\label{acknowledgements}

We thank Paulina Cherek for fixing and embedding samples for sSEM, Kei
Jokura for kindly sharing the anti-cPRC cilia antibody, Cameron Hird,
Adam Johnstone and Rebecca Turner for animal husbandry, Sanja Jasek for
IT support and data server maintenance, Rebecca Poon for advice on
quantification of ciliary dynamics, and Emelie Brodrick and Elizabeth
Williams for critical reading of the manuscript. This research was
funded by the Wellcome Trust Investigator Award 214337/Z/18/Z and the
Biotechnology and a Biological Sciences Research Council Response Mode
BB/W00853X/1 and ALERT BB/S019499/1 Grant. This project has received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
No 101020792).

\subsection{Figure Supplements}\label{figure-supplements}

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure1-FigureSupplement1.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 1---figure supplement 1. } Quantification of
swimming behaviour in \emph{Platynereis} larvae in response to pressure.
(A--J) Metrics of the pressure response in two-day-old larvae (A--E),
and three-day-old larvae (F--J). Dashed line at 60 s in each plot
indicates the end of stimulus. (A,F) Range of step increases in pressure
applied to larvae. The step increases were applied in randomized order
to each batch of larvae. (B,G) Change in mean speed relative to mean
speed before stimulus. (C,H) Mean vertical movement. (D,I) Straightness
index. The closer the value is to 1, the less tortuous the track is.
(E,J) Upward track index. Defined as the number of upward tracks divided
by the number of downward tracks. (K-L) Colour-coded trajectories of 2
day-old (K, Video 2) and 3 day-old (L, Video 3) larvae prior and during
a step increase in pressure. Trajectories to two different pressure
levels are shown, a moderate (top row), and a high (bottom row) step
increase. Each projection is 10 seconds long starting 10 s before
stimulus (-10 s,left-most column) and ending in the 30 s after stimulus
(30 s, right-most column). Colour code in B--E as in A, and in G--J as
in F. Each data point is the average of 2 to 12 (A--E), or 4 to 5 (F--J)
batches. Figure 1---source data 1 (A-E), Figure 1---source data 2
(F-J).}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure1-FigureSupplement2.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 1---figure supplement 2. } (A-B) One-day-old
\emph{Platynereis} larvae do not respond to small increases in pressure.
(A) Range of step increases in pressure applied to one-day-old larvae.
(B) Average vertical displacement of one-day-old larvae relative to
stimulus onset. Each data point is the average of 1 to 4 batches. (C--E)
three-day-old \emph{Platynereis} larvae respond to small changes in
hydrostatic pressure applied with a column of water. (C) Schematic of
the behavioural setup used to stimulate larvae with a column of water.
The height of the column was varied at random between 10 and 200 cm, in
10 cm increments. 1mb ≈ 1cm. (D) Vertical displacement as a function of
pressure onset. Vertical dashed line at 20 s indicates end of stimulus.
(E) Maximum increase in vertical displacement as a function of pressure.
Each data point in D--E is the average of up to 12 batches. Data in B
colour-coded as in A. Figure 1---source data 5 (A-B), Figure 1---source
data 6 (D-E).}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure1-FigureSupplement3.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 1---figure supplement 3 .} (A--C) Response of
three-day-old larvae to a linear increase in pressure. Each datapoint is
the average of 4 to 14 batches. (A) Average linear increase at five
different rates (colour code in B) and the fitted curves for the time
interval shown. (B) Mean change in vertical displacement at the five
different rates of pressure increase shown in A as a function of time.
(C) Maximum change in vertical displacement for each rate of pressure
increase. Data fitted with either a linear (dashed line) or a 2nd-degree
polynomial function (solid line). (D) Average pressure changes applied
for data shown in Figure 1F--G. (E--F) Average particle distribution (as
a proxy of larval distribution) across the chamber (divided in 5 bins,
as schematized in E) prior to pressure stimulus for each batch tested.
(G) Mean change in vertical displacement upon release of pressure from
100 mb and 500 mb after testing the step increases in pressure shown in
D. The mean pressure change applied is overlaid on the same plot. (H)
Maximum decrease in relative vertical displacement after stimulus start
for each set increment in pressure across the 3 acclimation conditions.
The ``release'' dataset consists of the trials shown in G. Dashed line
at 60 s in D and G indicates the point of pressure release and increase,
respectively. 5 (0, 100 mb) or 6 (500 mb) batches tested in D---H.
Figure 1---source data 7 (A-C), Figure 1---source data 3 (D, F-H).}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure1-FigureSupplement4.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 1---figure supplement 4. } Ciliary dynamics
assay. (A, top) Schematic of the preparation used to quantify ciliary
beat frequency. (A, bottom left) Snapshot of a glued two-day-old larva
in the pressure setup. (A, bottom right) Standard deviation projection
of time-lapse recording to highlight ciliary band activity. (B) Average
pressure levels measured during the experiments corresponding to data
shown in Figure 1H. The step increases were applied in randomized order
to each larva. (C) Maximum percentage change in CBF during the first 30
s of the stimulus period for each of the step increases in pressure
tested. One-tailed unpaired t-test with Bonferroni correction. p-values
\textless{} 0.05 are shown. Data points from the same larva are joined
by lines. N= 18---22 larvae. (D) Individual (thin traces) and mean
(thick traces) CBF as a function of pressure level. Dashed line
indicates end of pressure stimulus. Figure 1---source data 4 (B-D)}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure2-FigureSupplement1.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 2---figure supplement 1.} Ca²⁺ imaging during
pressure increase revealed cells activated during pressure. Maximum
intensity projections of two-day-old larvae injected with \emph{GCaMP6s}
mRNA. 4 larvae are shown. (Top panels for each larva) Projections
acquired before (+0 mb) or during (+pressure) presentation of the
stimulus. (Bottom panels for each larva) Close-up views of the regions
highlighted with dashed squares in the top panels. White asteriks mark
the position of cell nuclei of the four sensory cells activated by
pressure (cPRCs). Blue asterisk marks the position of the assymetric
sensory cell SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp}. Green asterisks mark the
position of the putative INNOS cells. Pressure \textgreater{} 500 mb in
all samples shown.}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure2-FigureSupplement2.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 2---figure supplement 2. } Ca²⁺ imaging in cPRCs
and in SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp}. (A) Step pressure increases applied
to two-day-old larvae in the Ca²⁺ imaging pressure setup (see Figure
2A). The step increases were applied to each larva in a randomized
order. (B) Mean ∆R/R in cPRC\_r1, cPRC\_l2 and cPRC\_r2 as a function of
time relative to pressure increase (t = 0). (C) Max.∆R/R in in cPRC\_r1,
cPRC\_l2 and cPRC\_r2 as a function of pressure level. One-tailed
unpaired t-test with Bonferroni correction testing for an increase in
Max.∆R/R with pressure. p-values \textless{} 0.05 are shown. (D) ∆R/R in
SN\textsuperscript{d1\_unp} upon 750 mb pressure increase. Thick line is
the mean of individual measuremnts (thinner lines). (E) Individual ∆R/R
measurements (thin lines) in the four cPRCs across different steps of
pressure increase as a function of time of stimulation. Thicker line is
the mean ∆R/R for each pressure level and cell. Dashed lines at 60 s in
B-D mark the end of stimulus. N= 2-4 (cPRC\_r1),4-5 (cPRC\_l2), 4
(cPRC\_r2), 4 (SN\^{}d1\_unp) cells in B--D. Figure 2---source data 2
(A-E).}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure3-FigureSupplement1.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 3---figure supplement 1. } Response of
three-day-old \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae to
pressure.(A) Mean pressure increase steps applied to three-day-old
\emph{WT} or \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae. (B) Average
swimming speed per batch of \emph{WT} or
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae in the 10 s prior to
pressure increase. One-tailed unpaired Wilcoxon-test testing for a
decrease in swimming speed in mutant larvae: p = 0.188. (C) Change in
mean vertical displacement as a function of time of stimulation for each
genotype and step increase in pressure. Individual data points are also
plotted. Dashed lines at 60 s mark the end of stimulus. N= 7-9
(\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}) batches, N = 8-10 (\emph{WT})
batches in A---C. (D) Mean CBF for two-day-old \emph{WT} or
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae in the 30 s prior to
stimulus onset. N = 29 (\emph{WT}) 19
(\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}}) larvae. One-tailed unpaired
t-test testing for a decrease in CBF in mutant larvae: p= 0.786. (E)
Maximum \% change in CBF (\% ∆CBF) upon pressure increase in two-day-old
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae. One-tailed unpaired t-test
with Bonferroni correction. p-values \textless{} 0.05 are shown. N =
10-17 larvae. (F) Maximum percentage change in CBF during the first 30 s
of the stimulus period in WT (N = 18-22 larvae) and in
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} (N = 10---17 larvae) 2-day-old
larvae. One-tailed unpaired t-test with Bonferroni correction (G) Max.
intensity projections of cPRC cilia of two-day-old \emph{WT} and
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae used for quantifiying cPRC
ciliary volume (see Figure 3D). Figure 3---source data 1 (A-C), Figure
1---source data 4 (D-F).}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure3-FigureSupplement2.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 3---figure supplement 2. } Morphology of cPRC
cilia in three-day-old \emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larvae. (A)
Overview of ultrastucture of cPRC cilia in a
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} larva. Rectangles highlight
branches with 2 pairs of microtubule doublets shown in enlarged views on
the right. (B) Length of cPRC cilia of \emph{WT} (N = 15 cilia) and
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} (N = 17 cilia) larvae measured
from EM volume reconstructions. Unpaired Wilcoxon test for larger
branches in the \emph{WT} larva: p = 0.228. (C) Length distribution of
the branch closest to the basal body (highest Strahler order) for each
genotype shown as a percentage of the total ciliary arbor length.
One-tailed unpaired Wilcoxon test for longer branches in the mutant: p =
0.082. (E) Ratio of terminal to internal branch lengths of cPRC cilia
for each genotype. Unpaired Wilcoxon test for higher
terminal-to-internal branch length ratio in the \emph{WT} larva: p =
0.228.}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}[H]

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{Figures/Figure4-FigureSupplement1.png}

}

\caption{\textbf{Figure 4---figure supplement 1. } Effect of
TeTxLC-mediated inhibition of serotonergic ciliomotor neurons on CBF
during pressure stimulation. (A) Maximum percentage change in CBF during
the first 30 s of the stimulus period in 2-day-old larvae injected with
the control plasmid TPHp::tdT (N = 14-16 larvae), or with the
TPHp::tdT-P2A-TeTxLC plasmid (N = 13-16 larvae).One-tailed unpaired
t-test with Bonferroni correction. (B) Individual (thin traces) and mean
(thick traces) CBF as a function of pressure level for larvae injected
with the indicated plasmid construct. Dashed line indicates end of
pressure stimulus. Figure 4---source data 1 (A-B).}

\end{figure}%

\subsection{Videos}\label{videos}

\textbf{Video 1.} Response of 2 day-old \emph{Platynereis} larvae to a
pressure increase of 1 bar. Larvae were placed in a pressure vessel (100
mm height) and recorded in effective darkness (with 850 nm light) with a
camera placed in front of the vessel (see Figure 1A). Larvae swim
towards the top of the chamber as soon as pressure is increased. Blue
traces (10 s long) delineate swimming trajectories.

\textbf{Video 2.} Zoomed-in view of 2 day-old larvae as they respond to
an increase in pressure of 85 mb (left panel) or 500 mb. Blue traces
(each 4 s long) delineate swimming trajectories. The two videos are
played at the same speed.

\textbf{Video 3.} Zoomed-in view of 3 day-old larvae as they respond to
an increase in pressure of 32 mb (left panel) or 778 mb. Blue traces
(each 4 s long) delineate swimming trajectories. The two videos are
played at the same speed.

\textbf{Video 4.} Representative recording of a 2 day-old larva tethered
to a glass cuvette and imaged from the anterior side to quantify the
effect of pressure on the ciliary dynamics. Note how ciliary beating
speeds up soon after the step change in pressure (998 mb).

\textbf{Video 5.} Time-lapse confocal microscopy recording showing the
change in GCaMP6s fluorescence (fire colour scale) in a cPRC as a
function of pressure increase (750 mb). The increase in GCaMP6s signal
is noticeable both in the cell body (cb) and in the cilia. Some frames
are shifted in XY due to sample movement.

\textbf{Video 6.} 360º view of electron microscopy reconstruction of
sensory cilia from one pair of ciliary photoreceptor cells in a wildtype
3-day-old larva. The branches of each cilium are coloured according to
their position along the cilium: basal (pink), intermediate (green) or
light blue (terminal). Basal bodies are shown as black spheres. The cell
and nucleus of one of the cells is outlined (previously reconstructed in
).

\textbf{Video 7.} 360º view of electron microscopy reconstruction of
sensory cilia from one pair of ciliary photoreceptor cells in a
\emph{c-ops-1\textsuperscript{∆8/∆8}} 3-day-old larva. The branches of
each cilium are coloured according to their position along the cilium:
basal (pink), intermediate (green) or light blue (terminal). Basal
bodies are shown as black spheres. The part of the cell body imaged in
the volume is outlined.

\section*{References}\label{references}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{References}

\phantomsection\label{refs}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-ackermann2005}
Ackermann C, Dorresteijn A, Fischer A. 2005. Clonal domains in
postlarvalPlatynereis dumerilii (Annelida: Polychaeta). \emph{Journal of
Morphology} \textbf{266}:258--280.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/jmor.10375}{10.1002/jmor.10375}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-akiyama2004}
Akiyama T. 2004. Entrainment of the Circatidal Swimming Activity Rhythm
in the Cumacean Dimorphostylis asiatica (Crustacea) to 12.5-hour
Hydrostatic Pressure Cycles. \emph{Zoological Science}
\textbf{21}:29--38.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.2108/0289-0003(2004)21\%5B29:eotcsa\%5D2.0.co;2}{10.2108/0289-0003(2004)21{[}29:eotcsa{]}2.0.co;2}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-arendt2004}
Arendt D, Tessmar-Raible K, Snyman H, Dorresteijn AW, Wittbrodt J. 2004.
Ciliary Photoreceptors with a Vertebrate-Type Opsin in an Invertebrate
Brain. \emph{Science} \textbf{306}:869--871.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1099955}{10.1126/science.1099955}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-baatrup1982}
Baatrup E. 1982. On the Structure of the Corpuscles of de Quatrefages
({\emph{Branchiostoma lanceolatum}}(P)). \emph{Acta Zoologica}
\textbf{63}:39--44.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1463-6395.1982.tb00757.x}{10.1111/j.1463-6395.1982.tb00757.x}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-bell2008}
Bell A. 2008. The pipe and the pinwheel: Is pressure an effective
stimulus for the 9+0 primary cilium? \emph{Cell Biology International}
\textbf{32}:462--468.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.03.001}{10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.03.001}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-bezares-calderon2018}
Bezares-Calderón LA, Berger J, Jasek S, Verasztó C, Mendes S, Gühmann M,
Almeda R, Shahidi R, Jékely G. 2018. Neural circuitry of a
polycystin-mediated hydrodynamic startle response for predator
avoidance. \emph{eLife} \textbf{7}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.36262}{10.7554/elife.36262}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-bezares-calderon2019}
Bezares-Calderón LA, Berger J, Jékely G. 2019. Diversity of cilia-based
mechanosensory systems and their functions in marine animal behaviour.
\emph{Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences} \textbf{375}:20190376.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0376}{10.1098/rstb.2019.0376}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-blaxter_1978}
Blaxter JHS. 1978. Baroreception In: Ali MA, editor. Sensory Ecology.
Boston, {MA}: Springer {US}. pp. 375--409.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-3363-0/_15}{10.1007/978-1-4684-3363-0\textbackslash\_15}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-bocchero2020}
Bocchero U, Falleroni F, Mortal S, Li Y, Cojoc D, Lamb T, Torre V. 2020.
Mechanosensitivity is an essential component of phototransduction in
vertebrate rods. \emph{PLOS Biology} \textbf{18}:e3000750.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000750}{10.1371/journal.pbio.3000750}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-buxf6hm2016}
Böhm UL, Prendergast A, Djenoune L, Nunes Figueiredo S, Gomez J, Stokes
C, Kaiser S, Suster M, Kawakami K, Charpentier M, Concordet J-P, Rio
J-P, Del Bene F, Wyart C. 2016. CSF-contacting neurons regulate
locomotion by relaying mechanical stimuli to spinal circuits.
\emph{Nature Communications} \textbf{7}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10866}{10.1038/ncomms10866}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-cardona2012}
Cardona A, Saalfeld S, Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Preibisch S,
Longair M, Tomancak P, Hartenstein V, Douglas RJ. 2012. TrakEM2 Software
for Neural Circuit Reconstruction. \emph{PLoS ONE} \textbf{7}:e38011.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038011}{10.1371/journal.pone.0038011}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-chen2013}
Chen T-W, Wardill TJ, Sun Y, Pulver SR, Renninger SL, Baohan A,
Schreiter ER, Kerr RA, Orger MB, Jayaraman V, Looger LL, Svoboda K, Kim
DS. 2013. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal
activity. \emph{Nature} \textbf{499}:295--300.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12354}{10.1038/nature12354}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-dynamic2015}
Dynamic documents with r and knitr, second edition. 2015. Chapman;
Hall/CRC.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315382487}{10.1201/9781315382487}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-eakin1970}
Eakin RM, Kuda A. 1970. Ultrastructure of sensory receptors in ascidian
tadpoles. \emph{Zeitschrift für Zellforschung und Mikroskopische
Anatomie} \textbf{112}:287--312.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02584045}{10.1007/bf02584045}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-edelstein2010}
Edelstein A, Amodaj N, Hoover K, Vale R, Stuurman N. 2010. Computer
Control of Microscopes Using µManager. \emph{Current Protocols in
Molecular Biology} \textbf{92}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142727.mb1420s92}{10.1002/0471142727.mb1420s92}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fernandez2020}
Fernandez R, Moisy C. 2020. Fijiyama: a registration tool for 3D
multimodal time-lapse imaging. \emph{Bioinformatics}
\textbf{37}:1482--1484.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa846}{10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa846}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fischer2010}
Fischer AH, Henrich T, Arendt D. 2010. The normal development of
Platynereis dumerilii (Nereididae, Annelida). \emph{Frontiers in
Zoology} \textbf{7}:31.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-9994-7-31}{10.1186/1742-9994-7-31}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-forward_1989c}
Forward R, Wellins C, Buswell C. 1989. Behavioral responses of larvae of
the crab neopanope sayi to hydrostatic pressure. \emph{Marine Ecology
Progress Series} \textbf{57}:267--277.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.3354/meps057267}{10.3354/meps057267}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fraser_1994}
Fraser PJ, Macdonald AG. 1994. Crab hydrostatic pressure sensors.
\emph{Nature} \textbf{371}:383--384.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/371383b0}{10.1038/371383b0}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fraser_2002}
Fraser PJ, Shelmerdine RL. 2002. Dogfish hair cells sense hydrostatic
pressure. \emph{Nature} \textbf{415}:495--496.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/415495a}{10.1038/415495a}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-gambi1992}
Gambi MC, Lorenti M, Russo GF, Scipione MB, Zupo V. 1992. Depth and
Seasonal Distribution of Some Groups of the Vagile Fauna of the
Posidonia oceanica Leaf Stratum: Structural and Trophic Analyses.
\emph{Marine Ecology} \textbf{13}:17--39.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0485.1992.tb00337.x}{10.1111/j.1439-0485.1992.tb00337.x}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-genin2005a}
Genin A, Jaffe JS, Reef R, Richter C, Franks PJS. 2005. Swimming Against
the Flow: A Mechanism of Zooplankton Aggregation. \emph{Science}
\textbf{308}:860--862.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1107834}{10.1126/science.1107834}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-ghmann_2015}
Gühmann M, Jia H, Randel N, Verasztó C, Bezares-Calderón LA, Michiels
NK, Yokoyama S, Jékely G. 2015. Spectral tuning of phototaxis by a
go-opsin in the rhabdomeric eyes of platynereis. \emph{Current Biology}
\textbf{25}:2265--2271.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.017}{10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.017}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-hernandez-nicaise1984}
Hernandez-Nicaise M-L. 1984. Ctenophora. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp.
96--111.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-51593-4_9}{10.1007/978-3-642-51593-4\_9}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-iatsenko2019}
Iatsenko D, Lancaster G, McCormack S, Newman J, Guru Vamsi Policharla,
Ticcinelli V, Stankovski T, Stefanovska A. 2019. MODA v1.01. Zenodo.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.3470856}{10.5281/ZENODO.3470856}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-iatsenko2016}
Iatsenko D, McClintock PVE, Stefanovska A. 2016. Extraction of
instantaneous frequencies from ridges in time{\textendash}frequency
representations of signals. \emph{Signal Processing}
\textbf{125}:290--303.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2016.01.024}{10.1016/j.sigpro.2016.01.024}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-imambocus2022}
Imambocus BN, Zhou F, Formozov A, Wittich A, Tenedini FM, Hu C, Sauter
K, Macarenhas Varela E, Herédia F, Casimiro AP, Macedo A, Schlegel P,
Yang C-H, Miguel-Aliaga I, Wiegert JS, Pankratz MJ, Gontijo AM, Cardona
A, Soba P. 2022. A neuropeptidergic circuit gates selective escape
behavior of Drosophila larvae. \emph{Current Biology}
\textbf{32}:149--163.e8.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.069}{10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.069}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-jasek2022}
Jasek S, Verasztó C, Brodrick E, Shahidi R, Kazimiers T, Kerbl A, Jékely
G. 2022. Desmosomal connectomics of all somatic muscles in an annelid
larva. \emph{eLife} \textbf{11}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.71231}{10.7554/elife.71231}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Jekely2024}
Jékely G, Jasek S, Gühmann M, Bezares-Calderón LA, Williams EA, Shahidi
R. 2024. Whole-body connectome of a segmented annelid larva.
\emph{bioRxiv}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.17.585258}{10.1101/2024.03.17.585258}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-jokura2023}
Jokura K, Ueda N, Gühmann M, Yañez-Guerra LA, Słowiński P, Wedgwood KCA,
Jékely G. 2023.
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.02.551600}{Nitric oxide feedback
to ciliary photoreceptor cells gates a UV avoidance circuit}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-knightjones_1955}
Knight-Jones EW, Qasim SZ. 1955.
\href{https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14383773}{Responses of some
marine plankton animals to changes in hydrostatic pressure.}
\emph{Nature} \textbf{175}:941--942.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-lem1999}
Lem J, Krasnoperova NV, Calvert PD, Kosaras B, Cameron DA, Nicolò M,
Makino CL, Sidman RL. 1999. Morphological, physiological, and
biochemical changes in rhodopsin knockout mice. \emph{Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences} \textbf{96}:736--741.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.2.736}{10.1073/pnas.96.2.736}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2022a}
Li Y, Kučera O, Cuvelier D, Rutkowski DM, Deygas M, Rai D, Pavlovič T,
Vicente FN, Piel M, Giannone G, Vavylonis D, Akhmanova A, Blanchoin L,
Théry M. 2022.
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.07.479347}{Compressive forces
stabilise microtubules in living cells}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-lincoln_1970}
Lincoln RJ, Gilchrist I. 1970. An observational pressure vessel for
studying the behaviour of planktonic animals. \emph{Marine biology}
\textbf{6}:1--4.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/\%7BBF00352600\%7D}{10.1007/\{BF00352600\}}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-liu2015}
Liu C, Montell C. 2015. Forcing open TRP channels: Mechanical gating as
a unifying activation mechanism. \emph{Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications} \textbf{460}:22--25.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.067}{10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.067}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-luo2014}
Luo N, Conwell MD, Chen X, Kettenhofen CI, Westlake CJ, Cantor LB, Wells
CD, Weinreb RN, Corson TW, Spandau DF, Joos KM, Iomini C, Obukhov AG,
Sun Y. 2014. Primary cilia signaling mediates intraocular pressure
sensation. \emph{Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences}
\textbf{111}:12871--12876.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1323292111}{10.1073/pnas.1323292111}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-mcdonald2011}
McDONALD KL, WEBB RI. 2011. Freeze substitution in 3 hours or less.
\emph{Journal of Microscopy} \textbf{243}:227--233.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2818.2011.03526.x}{10.1111/j.1365-2818.2011.03526.x}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-morgan_1984}
Morgan E. 1984. The pressure-responses of marine invertebrates: A
psychophysical perspective. \emph{Zoological journal of the Linnean
Society} \textbf{80}:209--230.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-3642.1984.tb01974.x}{10.1111/j.1096-3642.1984.tb01974.x}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-morgan1965}
Morgan E. 1965. The activity rhythm of the amphipod corophium volutator
(pallas) and its possible relationship to changes in hydrostatic
pressure associated with the tides. \emph{The Journal of Animal Ecology}
\textbf{34}:731. doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.2307/2459}{10.2307/2459}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-nasrin2021}
Nasrin SR, Ganser C, Nishikawa S, Kabir AMdR, Sada K, Yamashita T,
Ikeguchi M, Uchihashi T, Hess H, Kakugo A. 2021. Deformation of
microtubules regulates translocation dynamics of kinesin. \emph{Science
Advances} \textbf{7}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf2211}{10.1126/sciadv.abf2211}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-naylor1984a}
Naylor E, Williams BG. 1984. Phase-Responsiveness of the Circatidal
Locomotor Activity Rhythm of {\emph{Hemigrapsus Edwardsi}} (Hilgendorf)
to Simulated High Tide. \emph{Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom} \textbf{64}:81--90.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/s0025315400059646}{10.1017/s0025315400059646}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-uxf6zpolat2021}
Özpolat BD, Randel N, Williams EA, Bezares-Calderón LA, Andreatta G,
Balavoine G, Bertucci PY, Ferrier DEK, Gambi MC, Gazave E,
Handberg-Thorsager M, Hardege J, Hird C, Hsieh Y-W, Hui J, Mutemi KN,
Schneider SQ, Simakov O, Vergara HM, Vervoort M, Jékely G,
Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Arendt D. 2021. The Nereid on the rise:
Platynereis as a model system. \emph{EvoDevo} \textbf{12}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1186/s13227-021-00180-3}{10.1186/s13227-021-00180-3}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-pang2021}
Pang J-J, Gao F, Wu SM. 2021. Generators of Pressure-Evoked Currents in
Vertebrate Outer Retinal Neurons. \emph{Cells} \textbf{10}:1288.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10061288}{10.3390/cells10061288}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-pattappa2019}
Pattappa G, Zellner J, Johnstone B, Docheva D, Angele P. 2019. Cells
under pressure {\textendash} the relationship between hydrostatic
pressure and mesenchymal stem cell chondrogenesis. \emph{European Cells
and Materials} \textbf{36}:360--381.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.22203/ecm.v037a22}{10.22203/ecm.v037a22}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-preibisch2010}
Preibisch S, Saalfeld S, Schindelin J, Tomancak P. 2010. Software for
bead-based registration of selective plane illumination microscopy data.
\emph{Nature Methods} \textbf{7}:418--419.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth0610-418}{10.1038/nmeth0610-418}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-qutob1963}
Qutob Z. 1963. The swimbladder of fishes as a pressure receptor.
\emph{Archives Néerlandaises de Zoologie} \textbf{15}:1--67.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1163/036551662x00015}{10.1163/036551662x00015}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-ferreira2019}
R. Ferreira R, Fukui H, Chow R, Vilfan A, Vermot J. 2019. The cilium as
a force sensor{-}myth versus reality. \emph{Journal of Cell Science}
\textbf{132}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.213496}{10.1242/jcs.213496}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-randel2014}
Randel N, Asadulina A, Bezares-Calderón LA, Verasztó C, Williams EA,
Conzelmann M, Shahidi R, Jékely G. 2014. Neuronal connectome of a
sensory-motor circuit for visual navigation. \emph{eLife} \textbf{3}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.02730}{10.7554/elife.02730}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-rice_1964}
Rice AL. 1964. Observations on the effects of changes of hydrostatic
pressure on the behaviour of some marine animals. \emph{Journal of the
Marine Biological Association of the {UK}} \textbf{44}:163.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025315400024723}{10.1017/S0025315400024723}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-saalfeld2009}
Saalfeld S, Cardona A, Hartenstein V, Tomančák P. 2009. CATMAID:
collaborative annotation toolkit for massive amounts of image data.
\emph{Bioinformatics} \textbf{25}:1984--1986.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp266}{10.1093/bioinformatics/btp266}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-sulkin_1984}
Sulkin S. 1984. Behavioral basis of depth regulation in the larvae of
brachyuran crabs. \emph{Marine Ecology Progress Series}
\textbf{15}:181--205.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.3354/meps015181}{10.3354/meps015181}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-sweeney1995}
Sweeney ST, Broadie K, Keane J, Niemann H, O'Kane CJ. 1995. Targeted
expression of tetanus toxin light chain in Drosophila specifically
eliminates synaptic transmission and causes behavioral defects.
\emph{Neuron} \textbf{14}:341--351.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/0896-6273(95)90290-2}{10.1016/0896-6273(95)90290-2}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-tessmar-raible2007}
Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Christodoulou F, Guy K, Rembold M, Hausen H,
Arendt D. 2007. Conserved Sensory-Neurosecretory Cell Types in Annelid
and Fish Forebrain: Insights into Hypothalamus Evolution. \emph{Cell}
\textbf{129}:1389--1400.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.041}{10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.041}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-tosches2014}
Tosches M, Bucher D, Vopalensky P, Arendt D. 2014. Melatonin Signaling
Controls Circadian Swimming Behavior in Marine Zooplankton. \emph{Cell}
\textbf{159}:46--57.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.042}{10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.042}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Tsukamoto2017}
Tsukamoto H, Chen I-S, Kubo Y, Furutani Y. 2017. A ciliary opsin in the
brain of a marine annelid zooplankton is ultraviolet-sensitive, and the
sensitivity is tuned by a single amino acid residue. \emph{Journal of
Biological Chemistry} \textbf{292}:12971--12980.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.m117.793539}{10.1074/jbc.m117.793539}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-veraszto2018}
Verasztó C, Gühmann M, Jia H, Rajan VBV, Bezares-Calderón LA,
Piñeiro-Lopez C, Randel N, Shahidi R, Michiels NK, Yokoyama S,
Tessmar-Raible K, Jékely G. 2018. Ciliary and rhabdomeric
photoreceptor-cell circuits form a spectral depth gauge in marine
zooplankton. \emph{eLife} \textbf{7}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.36440}{10.7554/elife.36440}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-veraszto2017a}
Verasztó C, Ueda N, Bezares-Calderón LA, Panzera A, Williams EA, Shahidi
R, Jékely G. 2017. Ciliomotor circuitry underlying whole-body
coordination of ciliary activity in the Platynereis larva. \emph{eLife}
\textbf{6}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26000}{10.7554/elife.26000}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-williams2017}
Williams EA, Verasztó C, Jasek S, Conzelmann M, Shahidi R, Bauknecht P,
Mirabeau O, Jékely G. 2017. Synaptic and peptidergic connectome of a
neurosecretory center in the annelid brain. \emph{eLife} \textbf{6}.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26349}{10.7554/elife.26349}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-zanini2018}
Zanini D, Giraldo D, Warren B, Katana R, Andrés M, Reddy S, Pauls S,
Schwedhelm-Domeyer N, Geurten BRH, Göpfert MC. 2018. Proprioceptive
Opsin Functions in Drosophila Larval Locomotion. \emph{Neuron}
\textbf{98}:67--74.e4.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.02.028}{10.1016/j.neuron.2018.02.028}

\end{CSLReferences}



\end{document}
